He has won 245 show awards as Best of Breed and 19 awards as Best in Show.
The dogs eat again at 6
p.m.;    The house is designed for both human and canine comfort.
The other two owners think he has plenty of prizes still ahead.
"; McFadden said he handles an average of 20 to 25 dogs at each
show and works around 120 shows a year all over the U.S.
He has
helped the Police Department make hundreds of arrests and has
``apprehended'' more than 50 felons.
In the suit, he says that under the owners' agreement he lays out fees and other expenses for showing the animal and he decides when to show -- or to retire -- Cory.
; Kerrageen's Hotspur was scheduled to join McFadden in New York
City last week for the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show at Madison Square
Garden.
``We can find time for other things besides the intefadeh,''
said organizer Avi Marshak, using the Arabic word for uprising to
describe the 9-month-old wave of Palestinian violence aimed at
ending Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Other attractions include the appearance of Warren Eckstein, radio host of "Pet 
Show," who will answer behavioral questions about dogs (as well as cats, pigs 
and goldfish, if he's asked); free veterinary advice; a demonstration of how 
4-H youngsters help train puppies to become guide dogs, and more than 70 
vendors selling dog paraphernalia.
Israeli couples in cutoff jeans and short-sleeved shirts pushed
baby strollers from ring to ring to view the more than 50 different
breeds ranging from tiny lap dogs like the Yorkshire terriers to
Great Danes and St. Bernards.
With no seats and no food for the guests of
honor, everyone agreed that lunch at Sardi's had gone to the dogs.
Two dogs, to be specific, the city's top police dog and the
nation's top show dog.
If their master does not play with them, the dogs just scratch,
sniff, get bored and go to the door to wait for him.
The Dog Fanciers Club organized the event Wednesday to honor
Champion Great Elms Prince Charming II, a fluffy little Pomeranian,
and Nero, a big, amiable bruiser of a German shepherd.
The Remondis also say Mr. Attalla has bought a Rottweiler to show in another category and doesn't want to spend money on both Cory and the other dog.
; Over the last seven
years, McFadden and his wife have shown dogs representing approximately 75
percent of the 135 breeds of dog.
