Such is the life of one German short-haired pointer, a show dog bearing the name CH. Cory, as he is called for short, isn't any run-of-the-litter critter. He has won 245 show awards as Best of Breed and 19 awards as Best in Show. Basically, his problem comes from serving more than one master. One of the dog's three owners thinks the kennel-club world has seen enough of Cory, who is four years old. The other two owners think he has plenty of prizes still ahead. In what is fast becoming a pit-bull match, the one owner, Anthony Attalla, is suing the other two, John and Rita Remondi, charging that they have been showing Cory even though he is officially retired (as announced in Dog News). In the suit, filed in federal district court in Manhattan, Mr. Attalla says, "Cory has achieved the pinnacle of success . . . and any further competition would only diminish what he has accomplished." Mr. Attalla claims that his work with Cory is no gravy train. In the suit, he says that under the owners' agreement he lays out fees and other expenses for showing the animal and he decides when to show -- or to retire -- Cory. So far, Mr. Attalla says, he's spent over $125,000, the amount sought in damages. In return, he is entitled to all ribbons and awards. The Remondis are in charge of caring for the dog. Despite the retirement, the suit says, the Remondis showed Cory twice recently. ( He placed fourth and then didn't place at all.) For now, a judge's order temporarily bars them from further shows. In a memo filed in court, Mr. Remondi claims that Mr. Attalla retired the dog "simply and solely to better" the chances that Mr. Attalla's agent would win with a rival Rover. The Remondis also say Mr. Attalla has bought a Rottweiler to show in another category and doesn't want to spend money on both Cory and the other dog. They claim that Mr. Attalla has breached the pact by not paying certain expenses. The Remondis argue that the retirement "fraudulently" deprives them of their opportunity to show Cory, a dog who they assert "is in the best condition of his life." With no seats and no food for the guests of
honor, everyone agreed that lunch at Sardi's had gone to the dogs. Two dogs, to be specific, the city's top police dog and the
nation's top show dog. The Dog Fanciers Club organized the event Wednesday to honor
Champion Great Elms Prince Charming II, a fluffy little Pomeranian,
and Nero, a big, amiable bruiser of a German shepherd. ``He's a very friendly dog,'' said Nero's master, Officer Joseph
Faraguna. ``In all the arrests I've made with him, he's only bitten
four times.'' Nero specializes in sniffing out bombs and narcotics. He has
helped the Police Department make hundreds of arrests and has
``apprehended'' more than 50 felons. Nero was kept on his long leather leash while Prince emerged
from his elegant, padded carrying case only long enough to pose for
photographers. The Pomeranian was named best in show at the prestigious
Westminister Kennel Club Show in Madison Square Garden last month. Prince, long used to being coddled and primped, seemed oblivious
to all the attention until Nero grew bold enough to prod him on the
chin. But neither Nero nor Prince got any lunch from the luncheon at
Sardi's, a prominent midtown Manhattan restaurant. Prince, said his agent and master Skip Piazza, ``doesn't have a
very large diet anyway.'' More than 2,500 dogs, representing 138 breeds, will compete for prizes at 
Sunday's All Breed Dog Show and Obedience Trials at the Los Angeles Sports 
Arena. For families who are thinking about getting a dog, this is a chance to 
size up the possibilities and talk with pet owners about the advantages and 
disadvantages of different breeds. Around the arena, owners will be busy grooming and cajoling their charges into 
center-ring readiness. Between judgings, a troupe of Dobermans will jump through hoops and barrels and 
will scale walls. In the scent relay, teams of dogs will jump over hurdles and 
locate the jackets of their owners. There will also be a demonstration of how 
dogs herd farm animals. Other attractions include the appearance of Warren Eckstein, radio host of "Pet 
Show," who will answer behavioral questions about dogs (as well as cats, pigs 
and goldfish, if he's asked); free veterinary advice; a demonstration of how 
4-H youngsters help train puppies to become guide dogs, and more than 70 
vendors selling dog paraphernalia. A computer is provided for visitors' use to 
find out which breeds would best suit their life styles. Show hours are 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. Admission: adults, $4.50; children, $1. Taking a break from the headaches of the
Palestinian uprising and Israel's election campaign, thousands of
Israelis turned out Saturday for a canine beauty pageant. Marco, a feisty boxer owned by Dov Amir, padded off with the
champion's trophy after beating out 800 other pretty pooches in
Israel's dog-of-the-year contest held in Tel Aviv's Exhibition
Center. ``We can find time for other things besides the intefadeh,''
said organizer Avi Marshak, using the Arabic word for uprising to
describe the 9-month-old wave of Palestinian violence aimed at
ending Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. About 20,000 people attended the two-day show, organizers said. Israeli couples in cutoff jeans and short-sleeved shirts pushed
baby strollers from ring to ring to view the more than 50 different
breeds ranging from tiny lap dogs like the Yorkshire terriers to
Great Danes and St. Bernards. Marshak said the contest was sanctioned by the World Kennel Club
based in Brussels, Belgium, and had judges from the Netherlands,
South Africa, Italy and Britain. But although the competition was billed as an international
event, organizers conceded there were few if any contestants from
abroad. This was in contrast to 1987, before the uprising began,
when a World Dog Show competition attracted scores of foreign
competitors to Israel. ``Even so, we don't feel the intefadeh here,'' said Rafi Shahaf,
a veterinarian, who was interviewed in the show ring where Conan,
his steel gray Mastino Napoletano, had just taken a blue ribbon. The show briefly pushed the Nov. 1 general elections out of the
limelight for the doglovers. Experts say the razor-tight race
between the right-wing Likud Party and the left-leaning Labor Party
could determine the future of the Israeli-occupied Palestinian
lands. McFadden and his wife, Taffe, run their dog handling business in Campbell
and do it primarily for the enjoyment and satisfaction it brings. Those who
think you can get rich handling dogs are barking up the wrong tree.; "We
make a good living but the overhead is high and the hours long. Before a show
we sometimes work around the clock brushing and cleaning the dogs, working on
their coats," said McFadden. " And breeds such as poodles have to be highly
trimmed."; McFadden said he handles an average of 20 to 25 dogs at each
show and works around 120 shows a year all over the U.S. The dogs are frequent
winners in best of breed and best of show categories. " We finish with close to
100 champions a year," he said.; As a handler, McFadden emphasizes that he
doesn't do obedience training. His job is to trim and condition the dogs and
prepare them physically and mentally. The aim, he said, is to have a
"confident and happy dog" entering a competition.; Over the last seven
years, McFadden and his wife have shown dogs representing approximately 75
percent of the 135 breeds of dog. Taffe McFadden, a Vancouver, British
Columbia native who has been involved in dog handling since she was a child,
specializes in poodles. The couple also owns two standard poodles and breed
wire fox terriers.; McFadden's latest product, a Kerry blue terrier named
Kerrageen's Hotspur, won the best of show prize at the 81st Golden Gate Kennel
Club Dog Show held Feb. 2-3 at the Cow Palace in San Francisco. More than
2,000 purebred dogs participated in the national competition.; It was the
37th best in show win by Kerrageen's Hotspur, making him the top Kerry blue
terrier of all time. The dog is owned by Bryan Percy and Judy Hertwell of
Seattle.; Kerrageen's Hotspur was scheduled to join McFadden in New York
City last week for the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show at Madison Square
Garden. Recognized as one of the most prestigious shows in all of dogdom,
Westminster is also, with the exception of the Kentucky Derby, the longest
continuous sporting event held in the U.S.        Woof.; In this house, man and dogs speak as one. One need only listen while Wegman murmurs to Fay Ray and
Battina, her 1 1/2-year-old daughter.; On Valentine's Day, for example, he
said, "I'll take them out and play with them longer."; "But I don't want to
be known as a dog zombie," said Wegman, who did go to the Westminster Kennel
Club Dog Show without the dogs. " I go to movies and have friends and play
sports. When
Bill leaves, Batty howls," said Andrea Beeman, an assistant to Wegman.; Man
and dog;    Their home is one floor of a former Orthodox synagogue on the
Lower East Side of Manhattan. During a recent visit, it was possible to see
how the artist gets two even-tempered, relaxed, normal dogs to slip into
florid housedresses or scratch each other's backs. "I'd never heard of Weimaraners," said the artist, who was born 47
years ago in Longmeadow, Mass. His life with Weimaraners began in 1970, the
year he bought a new video camera and Man Ray, a puppy that cost $35.; Wegman had never photographed dogs before, but Man Ray was a perfect subject.; "He was gray and neutral," the artist said. " I could do him as a dog, a
man, a sculpture, a character, a bat, a frog, an elephant, an Airedale, a
dinosaur, a poodle. A dog's life;    Had he
been a different breed he would have been a "character actor," Wegman said,
"like Lassie."; When Man Ray, who had become world famous, died of cancer
in 1981, at the age of 11 years and 8 months, the artist mourned. " I dreamed
that he came back to life," said Wegman, who spent three years living without
a dog. " It was kind of liberating, the years I didn't have a dog."; In
1984, however, he got another Weimaraner, which was stolen. In 1985, he got Fay Ray, who is now a familiar face
not only among artists but among children who watch "Sesame Street."; As a
breed, Weimaraners combine "a lap-dog sensibility with a hunting capability,"
the artist said. They curl up on his lap, but since they are pointers, they
can hold a pose.; They are also good companions for an artist. Like world-famous
fashion models, these dogs are lean, supple and fit. In Wegman's home, which
comprises 2,000 square feet with 20-foot-high ceilings, they live a life
unencumbered -- one assumes -- by thoughts of fame or fortune, and seldom
hunger.; Each morning Wegman feeds them Eukanuba dog food, which he
considers the best around. " He often
adds a spoonful of plain yogurt or cottage cheese. The dogs eat again at 6
p.m.;    The house is designed for both human and canine comfort. There is
nowhere that Wegman goes that the dogs do not. If their master does not play with them, the dogs just scratch,
sniff, get bored and go to the door to wait for him.
