Exxon Corp. and Mobil Corp. have held discussions about combining 
their business operations, a person involved in the talks said Wednesday. Financial terms of the discussions could not be determined Wednesday. Consequently, chief executives of most 
oil companies have had to swallow their pride and look for suitable 
partners. He added, however, that a combination 
between Exxon and Mobil would not be an easy match because Mobil has 
been known for being a proud company that has said in the past that 
it would not want to merge. ``It will not be easy,'' he said of combining the two 
far-flung companies, which have vast networks of refineries and gas 
stations that overlap in the United States and Europe. ``If you offer 
enough money you can make anything happen,'' he added. Like other oil companies, they had hoped to quickly 
tap into the vast reserves of Russia. Even though they were prepared 
to spend billions, they have held back because of the political and 
economic crisis in Russia and great reluctance by Russian officials 
and oil companies to give up control of vast fields. On 
Wednesday, crude oil for January delivery fell 29 cents, or 2.6 percent, 
to $11.86 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, close to the 
12-year low of $11.42 reached on June 15. But those pledges have not always been honored, 
and rallies in the oil market this year have proven short-lived. OPEC 
members on Wednesday continued their discussion on extending their 
production cutbacks, and an agreement is expected as early as Thursday. The Federal Trade Commission is still reviewing British Petroleum's 
pending purchase of Amoco. ``If you asked me if Exxon needed to be 
bigger, the answer is probably no,'' said Garfield Miller, president 
of Aegis Energy Advisors Corp., a small independent investment bank 
based in New York. She 
said that Exxon, for example, has a strong presence in Angola, while 
Mobil does not. To further 
reduce costs, companies like Mobil are forming partnerships that stop 
short of full mergers. Though Mobil and Exxon might have 
high concentrations of gas stations in certain areas of the United 
States, analysts say they have far more competition at the pump than 
before oil prices collapsed in the 1980s. Chernow, the Rockefeller 
biographer, noted that two pieces of the Standard Oil trust are already 
likely to be united. Philip K. Verleger Jr., publisher 
of Petroleum Economics Monthly and a senior adviser to the Brattle 
Group, a Cambridge, Mass., consulting firm, spent some time late last 
week talking about Mobil, Exxon and the changing dynamics of the oil 
business. If there is a reason this merger might get extra attention, 
it will be because Exxon and Mobil have not been terribly friendly 
toward either the Clinton administration's or the European Union's 
positions on global warming. Why do they need to get bigger?(end italics) A. In the first 
decade of the next century, the really big exploration opportunities 
will be very capital intensive, and only companies with the deepest 
pockets will be able to stay in the game: Royal Dutch, Exxon and BP 
Amoco. I think we are going to see 
low oil prices for six months to a year. Q. (italics)The 
number of oil companies is going to shrink in coming years, regardless, 
isn't it?(end italics) A. We are probably heading toward a world in 
which there are no more than five or six big oil companies, possibly 
eight. There is really no precedent for having as many big players 
as we have in the oil business in this modern society. And it is an area where investors need to be careful, because 
in that period there will be a good deal of consolidation among smaller 
companies. Oil stocks led the way as investors soaked up the news 
of continuing talks between Exxon and Mobil on a merger that would 
create the world's largest oil company. The technology-heavy 
index finished 31.23 points, or 1.57 percent, higher, at 2,016.44. Exxon and Mobil, the nation's two largest oil companies, confirmed 
Friday that they were discussing a possible merger, and antitrust 
lawyers, industry analysts and government officials predicted that 
any deal would require the sale of important large pieces of such 
a new corporate behemoth. Ernest Lewis, whose overalls 
bore a ``Big E'' patch appropriate to his scale, added his uh-huh's. Antitrust regulators, they say, are bound to notice that Exxon has 
refineries an hour's drive in one direction and three hours in the 
other, along a Gulf of Mexico crescent that forms the petrochemical 
industry's home. ``People go there to retire there,'' Herrington said, as he 
drove around the plant's fenced periphery.
