Aspirin sales jumped 41 percent for a few weeks
earlier this year, not because of a rash of headaches. Without the treatment, patients had a 13 percent chance of dying
from a second heart attack within five weeks, the researchers
found. With the treatment, the figure dropped to 8 percent. Heart disease is the nation's leading cause of death, by far. The National Center for Health Statistics reports that 762,820
Americans died of heart disease in 1987. This does not
include those who died of blood-vessel diseases, such as strokes.) The
blockage arises from the buildup of fats, cholesterol and clotted
blood. Clot-dissolvers break up clots, thus restoring blood flow. Aspirin interferes with aspects of the clotting process, helping to
prevent clot formation in the first place. Some doctors predict that in the not-too-distant future these
drugs will be judged so safe that they will be administered
routinely by paramedics in ambulances before suspected heart attack
victims even reach the hospital. While most public attention has focused on this new ability to
prevent heart attacks, researchers have also made important
progress in speeding the recovery of patients who survive heart
attacks. Researchers at the University of Michigan recently determined
that some heart attack victims can be released from the hospital as
soon as three days after their heart attacks. The patients given early discharge were able to return to work
two weeks sooner than others in the study group. After six months,
not one death was recorded in the early-discharge group. The
researchers concluded that perhaps 15 percent of heart attacks
victims could be safely discharged after three days. All of these advances come at a time when public health experts
are increasingly emphasizing the role of good health and good
nutrition in lowering heart disease risk. U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop in July issued his first
report on nutrition, calling on Americans to lower their
consumption of fats and to eat more vegetables, fruits, fish,
poultry and whole grains. Koop's recommendations largely echo those of the
American Heart Association, but they should help carry the message
to many more people. Much can be done to prevent heart attacks, great improvements
are being made in treatments, and recovery is faster than ever
before. ``These results,'' says Dr. Peter Sleight of Oxford University,
``will change medical practice worldwide.'' The study found that if heart attack victims quickly receive
clot-dissolving drugs, they usually don't need the extra step of the
common balloon procedure, known as angioplasty. Some experts said the results are good news, because they mean
that most heart attack patients can be treated in community
hospitals, where angioplasty is not available. The study also has an important financial message. Sixty percent of them actually underwent the procedure,
which temporarily inflates balloons in dangerously narrowed heart
arteries to squeeze them open. A comparison group of 1,626 also got TPA. But they were not
considered for angioplasty unless they had lingering heart pain or
abnormal exercise tests during their recovery. After 42 days, 11 percent of those in the angioplasty group had
died or suffered further heart attacks, as did 10 percent of those
in the comparison group. About 93 percent of both groups were still alive. ``There does not appear to be any additional benefit from
angioplasty,'' Braunwald said. If the study had found that immediate angioplasty improves
survival, it would have meant that many more angioplasty labs would
need to be established and more doctors trained to give the
procedure. Heart attacks occur when a clot blocks an artery that feeds the
heart muscle. Many people delay
going to the hospital until permanent damage occurs. In others, the
treatment may be considered too dangerous because of recent surgery
or a history of strokes. The
latest study did not question the usefulness of this kind of
angioplasty. It is unknown what
distinguishes these seemingly healthy people from those who
don't suffer heart attacks. The blood and urine test is already being done in many
commercial laboratories but for medical conditions other than
heart attack risk, said John H. Laragh of the Cardiovascular
Center at Cornell University and New York Hospital. " In our
hands, it cost about $40 and in other labs it may cost the
patient $40 to $80," he said. The test, which isn't
patented, is available in kit form to laboratories. The release of renin is the first
step in a rapid chemical chain reaction that raises blood
pressure. The urine portion of the test tells how much salt
is in the bloodstream. A high concentration of salt in the
blood also raises pressure. The
theory has provoked sometimes furious controversy for almost
20 years. The Cornell cardiologist has argued that in many people
with high blood pressure the activity of the renin in the
blood is much higher than is warranted by the amount of salt
in the blood. Such "high renin" people are at a high risk of
a heart attack. On the other hand, in other patients with
high blood pressure, the activity of the renin is much lower
than is warranted by the degree of salt in the blood. They kept track of the workers for more than
eight years to see which had heart attacks. The results, published in this week's New England Journal
of Medicine, lend strong support to Dr. Laragh's theory. Only
12% of the patients had high renin "profiles." Alderman, Laragh and their
respective colleagues reported. Regardless of how the statisticians broke down the
patients into various groups, those with high renin profiles
almost invariably had the highest incidence of heart attacks. "But the real dynamite is in the patients who didn't have
any of the usual risk factors," Dr. Laragh said in an
interview. To Dr. Laragh, this suggests that a high renin profile
might signal a high risk of heart attack even for people
without high blood pressure. " We think everybody should have
this simple and accurate test," he said in the interview. In an accompanying editorial, Victor J. Dzau of Stanford
University medical school said the study shows that the renin
profile test is "potentially useful" in identifying high
blood pressure patients who are at risk of a heart attack. The experiment has implications for drug makers as well as
patients. Other
major drug makers are thought to also be working on renin
inhibitors. The experiment hints these drugs might also
protect patients from heart attacks. Studies are under way to
see if these ACE inhibitors protect patients against heart
attacks as well as lower their blood pressure. Calcium blockers are among several classes of
medicines commonly prescribed to relieve high blood pressure. ``This is the first trial that indicates that a calcium blocker
may be beneficial after an acute myocardial infarction,'' or heart
attack, said Dr. Carl J. Pepine of the University of Florida. Several other studies of calcium blockers, including one large
U.S. study published last year, failed to find any benefit from
using the medicines after heart attacks. While calcium blockers may not replace beta blockers after heart
attacks, the researchers said these drugs still should have a role
in treatment. ``We feel it is important to have alternatives. This means the drugs often cannot be given to
cigarette smokers, who are frequent victims of heart attacks. In the study, conducted at 20 community hospitals, doctors
compared 897 patients who got Verapamil after heart attacks with
878 people who took placebos. ``We wanted to see if an effect would be observed with
Verapamil,'' said Dr. Forgen Fischer Hansen of Copenhagen Municipal
Hospital. ``If it had an effect, it should be seen in the first 12 to 18
months, because there is a big increase in mortality in myocardial
infarction in this period,'' he said. The researchers believe that by reducing the amount of work
needed by the heart to sustain circulation, calcium blockers
lowered the chances of ischemia, episodes in which the heart's own
muscle is deprived of oxygen. They said they were unsure why earlier studies failed to show
any benefit from calcium blockers after heart attacks. However,
they noted that some studies enrolled patients who were also taking
beta blockers. And this might have obscured any benefits from
calcium blockers. The results were presented at a meeting of the American College
of Cardiology. This is a condition in which
people suffer spontaneous chest pain that is not triggered by work
or stress. Until now, the drugs have been used only to treat heart
attacks. An intestinal operation to lower the cholesterol
of heart attack patients reduced their risk for another heart
attack or death from heart disease, researchers said today. In the operation, doctors change the route of the small
intestine so about one-third of it is bypassed. This reduces the
amount of cholesterol that is absorbed into the bloodstream. The $52 million, 17-year study was conducted on people who had
already suffered heart attacks. The approach lengthened the lives
of people who had very mild heart attacks but not those with more
severe heart damage. In a comparison group without the intestinal surgery, it
was 39 percent. Dr. Henry Buchwald of the University of Minnesota, who directed
the study, said the surgery should be considered along with
cholesterol-lowering drugs as a possible standard treatment. ``It is
eminently logical to extend all cholesterol-lowering therapy,
including this, to patients with high cholesterol who have not had
a heart attack.'' Besides diarrhea, those who undergo the surgery are somewhat
more prone to have kidney stones, gallstones and intestinal
obstructions. Despite wide acceptance of cholesterol lowering, doubts remain
about whether it actually helps people live longer if they already
have healthy hearts. Although the latest study was conducted
exclusively on people who had suffered heart attacks, Buchwald said
he believes the research should settle that question. ``It offers the strongest justification for marked lipid
(cholesterol) ineervention that has ever been offered,'' Buchwald
said. ``It is a very powerful study and should, except for certain
people who will never be satisfied, end the cholesterol
controversy.'' In the study, 421 people who recovered from heart attacks
underwent the surgery, while a comparison group of 417 people were
treated with diet alone. At the start of the study, their average
cholesterol levels were 251. The surgery lowered people's
cholesterol 23 percent. Lefer said his research team simulated heart attacks in 24 rats
by partially blocking key arteries in their hearts. In 12 of the rats, the researchers injected a placebo. In the
other 12, they injected transforming growth factor beta. For those who received the TGF beta, said Lefer, ``the damage
from the attack was much less severe. Hearts damaged when the blood supply is interrupted, as in a heart
attack, tend to lose creatine kinase, said Lefer. Thus, by
measuring for the loss of this substance, researchers could
determine the amount of heart damage. Narrowed blood vessels
carry less oxygen-rich blood to cells and this causes additional
injury following a heart attack. Though TGF beta is produced naturally in the body, Lefer said
his research team used a substance produced artificially by
Genentech, a California biotechnology firm. Lefer said his team is now conducting additional studies with
TGF beta and that any experimental treatment of human heart attack
victims with the substance is at least a year away. Jefferson Medical College, where the study was done, is part of
Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. Science, which published the study, is the journal of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. They found that these people had no unusual complications,
got back to work sooner and had substantially lower medical bills. ``There were no problems with any
serious events.'' Topol said the early discharges were made possible by two recent
medical advances _ tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA, and
angioplasty. When given quickly after a heart attack, TPA can dissolve clots
in the heart's arteries and minimize damage. However, the study in the New England Journal of Medicine said
more research is needed before the findings are widely adopted. However, doctors learned that long inactivity did more harm than
good. Patients got out of shape, developed blood clots and became
demoralized. In the 1960s, the stay was shortened to three weeks and in the
1970s to two weeks. Now, doctors typically keep heart attack
patients hospitalized seven to 10 days. In their paper, the doctors determined that 80 of the 507 heart
attack patients studied were healthy enough to be considered for
early discharge. None of them had irregular heart beats, chest pain
or heart failure. Treadmill tests showed no signs of heart attack
damage. Forty patients were sent home after three days, while the rest
stayed seven to 10 days. However, people in the early discharge group were able to return
to work about two weeks sooner than the others, and their medical
bills were significantly lower _ $12,546 versus $17,868. The researchers estimated that if 15 percent of all heart attack
patients were discharged after three days, the annual saving would
be at least $280 million. ``The good news is that we continue to see an improvement in the
death rate from the biggest killer of our population,'' said Dr.
Bernadine Healy of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, who is president
of the heart association. ``Those trends are dramatic and don't seem to be reversing,'' she
said. ``The bad news is that heart disease is still killing almost 1
million Americans a year, and we've got a long way to go.'' The association released the statistics at its annual forum for
science writers. Experts attribute the decline in death rates to a combination of
healthier living habits, including fewer cigarettes and better food,
and improved medical treatment. ``The public ought to appreciate the progress that has been made
in heart disease over the past 20 years,'' said Dr. Myron L.
Weisfeldt of Johns Hopkins University. It underlies most heart attacks, the single most lethal
heart ailment. Association figures indicated that in 1986 _ the most recent year
for which there are statistics _ an estimated 978,500 Americans died
from heart attacks, strokes and other diseases of the heart and
blood vessels. Between 1976 and 1986, the death rate from all forms of
cardiovascular disease fell 24 percent. It declined 28 percent for
heart attacks and 40 percent for strokes. About 60 percent of the heart attack deaths occur before the
victim reaches the hospital. Studies show that about half of all
heart attack victims wait more than two hours before getting to an
emergency room. Weisfeldt said a major health goal is getting people to go to the
hospital within three or four hours of the first sign of heart
attacks. This treatment can save lives and reduce the disability of heart
attacks. The heart association estimates that cardiovascular disease will
cost $88.2 billion this year in medical expenses and lost wages. Among other statistics released by the association:
   _The most common cardiovascular disease is high blood pressure,
which affects 60 million Americans. _About 200,000 of the deaths from cardiovascular disease each
year occur in people under age 65. _There were 1,418 heart transplants in 1987, almost nine times as
many as in 1983. _About 2.5 million Americans have angina, the chest pain
resulting from clogged heart arteries. _As many as 1.5 million Americans will have heart attacks this
year. Surprisingly, however, the study found that the drug, diltiazem,
increases the chance of a subsequent heart attack in patients whose
hearts pump abnormally, experts said. The drug was tested in 38 hospitals in the United States and
Canada on patients who had recently suffered a heart attack, said
Dr. Arthur Moss, a clinical professor of medicine at the University
of Rochester and the principal investigator for the study. ``We now know when to prescribe this drug and when not to,''
Moss said. Diltiazem is a calcium entry blocker, the newest class of drugs
to be introduced in the fight against heart disease. Nitrates and
beta blockers are the other types commonly prescribed by doctors. Patients
were recruited from 1983 to 1986 and followed for 12 to 52 months. Dr. John Schroeder, a cardiologist and professor at Stanford
University, said he was surprised that the drug increased the
chance of heart attack in any group and that overall results were
not higher. ``I think it
will mean that more patients will be routinely put on this drug on
a long-term basis.'' Nitrates have been used for more than 50 years, and beta
blockers were developed in the 1960s. Taking aspirin to prevent heart attacks may increase some people's chances of dying of other things, especially hemorrhagic strokes, the agency said in a commentary in today's Journal of the American Medical Association. Strokes are the result of brain damage caused by bleeding in the brain or by blood clots; hemorrhagic strokes are those caused by bleeding. The FDA commentary pointed to 10 hemorrhagic strokes recorded among the 11,000 subjects taking aspirin in the recent study, compared with two such strokes among 11,000 subjects taking the substitute. "We agree with them completely," said Dr. Julie Buring, a Harvard University researcher who participated in the aspirin study. She added in a telephone interview yesterday that an extension of the study is under way, and researchers expect to report to the FDA in late fall.
