The National Center for Health Statistics reports that 762,820
Americans died of heart disease in 1987.
Dr. John Schroeder, a cardiologist and professor at Stanford
University, said he was surprised that the drug increased the
chance of heart attack in any group and that overall results were
not higher.
``The bad news is that heart disease is still killing almost 1
million Americans a year, and we've got a long way to go.''
Much can be done to prevent heart attacks, great improvements
are being made in treatments, and recovery is faster than ever
before.
Researchers at the University of Michigan recently determined
that some heart attack victims can be released from the hospital as
soon as three days after their heart attacks.
Sixty percent of them actually underwent the procedure,
which temporarily inflates balloons in dangerously narrowed heart
arteries to squeeze them open.
Diltiazem is a calcium entry blocker, the newest class of drugs
to be introduced in the fight against heart disease.
Taking aspirin to prevent heart attacks may increase some people's chances of dying of other things, especially hemorrhagic strokes, the agency said in a commentary in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.
In an accompanying editorial, Victor J. Dzau of Stanford
University medical school said the study shows that the renin
profile test is "potentially useful" in identifying high
blood pressure patients who are at risk of a heart attack.
Lefer said his team is now conducting additional studies with
TGF beta and that any experimental treatment of human heart attack
victims with the substance is at least a year away.
In our
hands, it cost about $40 and in other labs it may cost the
patient $40 to $80," he said.
Weisfeldt said a major health goal is getting people to go to the
hospital within three or four hours of the first sign of heart
attacks.
Association figures indicated that in 1986 _ the most recent year
for which there are statistics _ an estimated 978,500 Americans died
from heart attacks, strokes and other diseases of the heart and
blood vessels.
``The public ought to appreciate the progress that has been made
in heart disease over the past 20 years,'' said Dr. Myron L.
Weisfeldt of Johns Hopkins University.
This treatment can save lives and reduce the disability of heart
attacks.
The researchers believe that by reducing the amount of work
needed by the heart to sustain circulation, calcium blockers
lowered the chances of ischemia, episodes in which the heart's own
muscle is deprived of oxygen.
