Maik Polster was a stern-faced member of the
East German secret police. Patrick Gainey took pictures for the
U.S. Army. Andreas Bratke was an East German who wanted to be a West
German. Illa Wobig saw eight people just like him die on her street. What they all had in common was a little white shack on the west
side of the Berlin Wall, a guardhouse with a funny name that stood
as a chilling symbol of the tensions that divided a street, a city,
a nation, the world. Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Allied border crossing on the west
side of the Berlin Wall, was lifted into the sky by a giant crane
Friday, placed gently onto a flatbed truck and consigned to history. It was emptied, locked and taken away in an elaborate ceremony
attended by six foreign ministers, a brace of generals, a brass
brand and hundreds of reporters. Gen. Francois Lann
barked to a young American officer, who crisply led away the last
contingent of military police. The public was not invited to the ceremony on Friedrich Street,
the avenue blocked by Checkpoint Charlie and its once-feared East
German counterpart nearby. Illa Wobig raised six children in a fourth-floor apartment just
20 yards from Checkpoint Charlie. They saw it from their window for
24 years, and they saw it disappear Friday. ``I saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' said Mrs.
Wobig, 55. ``I saw an East German officer try to go under a guard
rail. She said she saw at least 20 successful escapes. ``Some were in cars and some came through a tunnel across the
street,'' she said. ``Some would walk very slowly, look around and
just run.'' She is not sure if one of the people she saw was Andreas Bratke,
a 23-year-old East Berlin construction worker. Tunnels, balloons, customized vehicles and other elaborate
methods were used to flee past the Berlin Wall by desperate East
Germans. Bratke is now a West Berlin engineering student. He was taking
his certification examinations this week. Eight months after Bratke made his bold escape, Sgt. Patrick
Gainey was coming back from a party when he saw a huge commotion
near Checkpoint Charlie. ``This guy had driven a cement truck with his girlfriend and
baby through the checkpoint,'' said Gainey, a U.S. Army
photographer. ``He drove a half-mile into the west side just to
make sure. When he stopped, he asked if he was in West Berlin.'' The escapee was Hans-Joachim Pofahl, who made the crossing
through a hail of bullets. East Germany's border guards were as feared as members of the
secret police. According to guard Maik Polster, they were members
of the secret police. ``I was with the state security,'' said Polster, 23, as he
genially waved tourists through the East German checkpoint that is
expected to follow Checkpoint Charlie into oblivion. ``We had to maintain a certain level of appearance,'' he said. The stone-faced scrutiny of the East German border guards helped
give Checkpoint Charlie its chilling cachet. The checkpoint went up with the Berlin Wall in 1961. With the wall being dismantled daily in anticipation of German
unification, U.S. officials decided to remove Checkpoint Charlie
with a grand flourish. Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze and their counterparts from France, Britain and
the two Germanys presided over the ceremony. While the Berlin Wall is coming down, temporary barricades were
put up to keep the public from the ceremony. Several hundred craned
their necks to watch from a half-block away. Eilli Wiechies, 60, watched the pageantry from his wheelchair on
the sidewalk in front of his apartment house, one of the few
regular people allowed on the grounds. ``Finally, Germans can cross,'' he said, bitter that the Allied
border crossing was reserved only for non-Germans. A U.S. Army band played ``That is the Berlin Atmosphere,'' a
stirring old song about the old Berlin, as the white checkpoint
building was lifted to within 30 feet of Mrs. Wobig's window. A sign saying ``What a pity, Checkpoint Charlie,'' hung from her
sill. ``I saw Kennedy, Reagan and Carter give speeches here,'' she
said. This is wonderful for
history, but it is sad for me. The Soviet Union said today that a united
Germany can join NATO after a five-year transition period during
which all Soviet and U.S. troops would leave the country. The
United States rejected the proposal, a U.S. official said. The proposal was outlined by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard
Shevardnadze during international talks in East Berlin on the
strategic future of a united Germany. The remarks, a copy of which were obtained by The Associated
Press, indicates that a united Germany would be free to join the
Western NATO alliance after a five-year transitional period. But in exchange, Western and Soviet troops would pull out of the
country and Germany's own military strength would be sharply
reduced, according to the proposal. Shevardnadze made the proposal as he met with U.S. Secretary of
State James A. Baker III and their counterparts from Britain,
France and the two German states. ``I am underwhelmed,'' Baker said when asked about the Soviet
proposal while posing for pictures with the other foreign ministers. A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said U.S.
officials objected to the five-year time limit before Germany could
join NATO. The official said the other Western ministers expressed
the same reservations. The United States wants a united Germany to be a member of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Soviet Union has been
staunchly opposed. West Germany now is a mainstay of NATO and East Germany is a
member of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact. Shevardnadze said the Soviet proposal seeks to limit the
strength of the German armed forces and ``to revamp their structure
to make sure that they are rendered incapable for offensive
operations.'' It said those reductions could be undertaken over a three-year
period. Germany also would be prevented from producing or deploying
chemmical or nuclear weapons. It also said that within six months of unification, all Western
troops should leave West Berlin, which remains technically under
military occupation by the United States, France and Britian. The four nations would reduce their military forces in the
country during a three-year period following unification first by
50 percent, then ``bring them down to a level of token contingents,
or completely withdraw them from Germany.'' There are about 380,000 Soviet troops in East Germany, while a
quarter-million U.S. troops are stationed in West Germany along
with tens of thousands of British and French soldiers. Previously, the Soviets had said their troops would stay in what
is now East Germany for several years, but had left unclear the
exact plans for pulling them out. Shevardnadze, speaking earlier at a ceremony for the removal of
the Western Allies' Checkpoint Charlie, said he wanted the Big Four
Powers' troops out of ``greater Berlin'' within six months after
unification. The proposal, as translated into English by the Soviets and
distributed to the news media, apparently would also include the
Kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper. The United States, France and Great Britain have an estimated
12,000 troops in West Berlin. An official reached by telephone in
the office of the military attache at the Soviet embassy in East
Berlin said there were no Soviet troops stationed in the city
proper. Checkpoint Charlie, the Berlin Wall border post that symbolized the Cold War, 
was hoisted into history today. As a brass band played and foreign ministers of the four World War II allies 
watched, a crane lifted the prefabricated hut with its American, British and 
French flags and placed it on a flatbed truck to be taken to a museum. Checkpoint Charlie went up in 1961 in the middle of the Friedrichstrasse 
boulevard after Communist East Germany erected the Berlin Wall to choke off a 
flood of refugees to the enclave of West Berlin. "The checkpoint symbolized our conviction as allies that Berlin should remain 
one city and travel within it should be free," British Foreign Secretary 
Douglas Hurd said in a speech. "We always hoped that one day Checkpoint Charlie would no longer be needed, and 
now that day has arrived. At long last, we are bringing Charlie in from the 
cold," he added. Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze attended the ceremony in a 
gesture of reconciliation with the Western members of the wartime alliance: 
Britain, France and the United States. Shevardnadze, the first Soviet foreign minister to visit West Berlin, noted 
that the checkpoint was vanishing on the 49th anniversary of the Nazi invasion 
of the Soviet Union. "The closing of this checkpoint offers further proof of a turn for the better 
in the international arena, for overcoming the legacy of confrontation," he 
said. Foreign ministers Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany and Markus Meckel of 
East Germany also attended the ceremony. Genscher thanked Moscow for reform 
policies that had ended "a time of trouble" in Berlin and opened the door to 
unity. Hundreds of excited Berliners leaned from balconies and windows today to cheer 
Charlie's exit, snapping pictures and clapping in rhythm with the band as the 
crane pried the hut from its moorings and swung it away. Former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt, who emotionally challenged the 
building of the wall as mayor of West Berlin in the early 1960s, was in the 
front row of an invited audience. Afterward, souvenir hunters ran up and snatched cobblestones that had served as 
Checkpoint Charlie's foundation. Soldiers from three nations locked the doors
of Checkpoint Charlie today and a crane whisked away the Cold War
relic that symbolized a divided world. A U.S. Army band played a stirring song about old Berlin as the
rectangular white sentry station, a place East Germans died trying
to reach, was hoisted onto a truck for its passage into history. The famed Allied checkpoint by the Berlin Wall was closed with
an elaborate ceremony that brought together the top diplomats from
the Germanys and the four World War II Allies. ``For 29 years Checkpoint Charlie embodied the Cold War,'' U.S.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III told a crowd of invited
guests and journalists on Berlin's Friedrich Street. ``And now, 29 years after it was built, we meet here today to
dismantle it and to bury the conflicts it created.'' Baker, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and the
foreign ministers from France, Britain and the two Germanys each
heralded the end of the checkpoint as a symbol of change. Shevardnadze called for the removal of Berlin's status as an
Allied-controlled city and the withdrawal of troops within six
months after the two German states unify, which could come in
December. The proposal, as translated into English by the Soviets and
distributed later to news media, apparently would also include the
Kremlin's soldiers stationed just outside the city proper. The
United States, France and Great Britain have an estimated 12,000
troops in West Berlin. Berlin has been split into Soviet, U.S., British and France
sectors and West Berlin remains technically separate from West
Germany. The German and Allied foreign ministers are meeting in East
Berlin to discuss the status of the city and a united Germany's
role in world affairs. All borders are to be opened between the Berlins and the
Germanys by July 2, when the nations merge their economies. Large sections of the Berlin Wall are being dismantled daily,
and U.S. officials decided to time the removal of Checkpoint
Charlie with the foreign ministers' meeting. A color guard of French, British and American soldiers strode to
the building and locked the doors leading to each Allied nation's
compartment in the checkpoint. The giant crane then lifted the box-like building high into the
air. Ed McCarthy said he believes it is
destined for a museum. Checkpoint Charlie stood just 20 yards from an East German
checkpoint and was the only place between the Berlins that could be
crossed on foot by non-Germans. The ceremony was closed to the public but not to the residents
of the buildings that line Friedrich Street, which had been divided
by the Berlin Wall since 1961. Illa Wobig leaned out her window and watched the ceremony unfold
just 20 yards below the fourth-floor apartment where she has lived
for 24 years. ``I saw eight people shot to death on that street,'' she said. ``I saw an East German officer try to go under a guard rail. She said she also saw at least 20 successful escapes, by tunnel,
car and on foot. ``I saw Kennedy, Reagan and Carter give speeches here,'' she
said. This is wonderful for
history but it is sad for me. East German construction worker Andreas Bratke was working near
the wall in January 1986 when he suddenly bolted through the East
German checkpoint, down Friedrich Street and through Checkpoint
Charlie. ``I ran as fast as I could,'' he said from his home in West
Berlin. ``Checkpoint Charlie is a very important place to me.'' Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Allied border
crossing by the Berlin Wall, was to be hauled away Friday. Lorn Walsh late Thursday stood sentry for the
last time by the little white shack, rendered unnecessary by the
thaw in East-West relations. ``This is a nice way to end my military service ... to be here
when they take it down,'' said Walsh, 23, a military police officer
who leaves the army in six weeks to study for the priesthood. A huge crane hung over the small house in the middle of the
narrow street that leads to East Berlin, where a sign in English,
German, Russian and French says: ``You are now leaving the American
sector.'' Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze and their colleagues from France, Britain and
the two Germanys were to preside over a ceremony marking the
checkpoint's removal Friday. The envoys from the German states and the four World War II
Allies that divided them were in East Berlin to discuss the
international aspects of German unification. Since East Germany overthrew its Communist government last fall
and the German borders were opened, Checkpoint Charlie has become
as superfluous as the crumbling Berlin Wall. With huge sections of the Berlin Wall being ripped down daily,
U.S. officials decided two weeks ago to remove Checkpoint Charlie. The border crossing was the scene of stirring escapes and
heartbreaking captures as East Germans tried flee to the West,
breaking through East German control stations just 20 yards away
from the Allied checkpoint. East Germans once manned their side of the checkpoint with
emotionless effiency, closely scrutinizing travel documents and
creating a palpable tension. Thursday night, they merely waved
Westerners through their side of the checkpoint, although some
tourists demanded their documents be checked.
