Checkpoint Charlie, the famed Allied border crossing on the west
side of the Berlin Wall, was lifted into the sky by a giant crane
Friday, placed gently onto a flatbed truck and consigned to history.
Tunnels, balloons, customized vehicles and other elaborate
methods were used to flee past the Berlin Wall by desperate East
Germans.
With the wall being dismantled daily in anticipation of German
unification, U.S. officials decided to remove Checkpoint Charlie
with a grand flourish.
But in exchange, Western and Soviet troops would pull out of the
country and Germany's own military strength would be sharply
reduced, according to the proposal.
The United States wants a united Germany to be a member of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Soviet Union has been
staunchly opposed.
It also said that within six months of unification, all Western
troops should leave West Berlin, which remains technically under
military occupation by the United States, France and Britian.
The four nations would reduce their military forces in the
country during a three-year period following unification first by
50 percent, then ``bring them down to a level of token contingents,
or completely withdraw them from Germany.''
Checkpoint Charlie went up in 1961 in the middle of the Friedrichstrasse 
boulevard after Communist East Germany erected the Berlin Wall to choke off a 
flood of refugees to the enclave of West Berlin.
Genscher thanked Moscow for reform 
policies that had ended "a time of trouble" in Berlin and opened the door to 
unity.
Hundreds of excited Berliners leaned from balconies and windows today to cheer 
Charlie's exit, snapping pictures and clapping in rhythm with the band as the 
crane pried the hut from its moorings and swung it away.
``For 29 years Checkpoint Charlie embodied the Cold War,'' U.S.
Secretary of State James A. Baker III told a crowd of invited
guests and journalists on Berlin's Friedrich Street.
The German and Allied foreign ministers are meeting in East
Berlin to discuss the status of the city and a united Germany's
role in world affairs.
Large sections of the Berlin Wall are being dismantled daily,
and U.S. officials decided to time the removal of Checkpoint
Charlie with the foreign ministers' meeting.
A color guard of French, British and American soldiers strode to
the building and locked the doors leading to each Allied nation's
compartment in the checkpoint.
A huge crane hung over the small house in the middle of the
narrow street that leads to East Berlin, where a sign in English,
German, Russian and French says: ``You are now leaving the American
sector.''
Secretary of State James A. Baker III, Soviet Foreign Minister
Eduard Shevardnadze and their colleagues from France, Britain and
the two Germanys were to preside over a ceremony marking the
checkpoint's removal Friday.
The envoys from the German states and the four World War II
Allies that divided them were in East Berlin to discuss the
international aspects of German unification.
East Germans once manned their side of the checkpoint with
emotionless effiency, closely scrutinizing travel documents and
creating a palpable tension.
