US CITIES along the Gulf of Mexico from Alabama to eastern Texas were on
storm watch last night as Hurricane Andrew headed west after sweeping across
southern Florida, causing at least eight deaths and severe property damage.
Although the damage from the hurricane's landfall in Florida on Monday was
much greater than initially esti mated, insurers' losses there are likely to
total less than Dollars 1bn, well below earlier expectations, a senior
member of Lloyd's insurance market said yesterday.
WHILE Hurricane Andrew was wreaking havoc across large parts of southern
Florida and Louisiana this week, a grade two dollar crisis (on a one-to-four
scale, four being most severe) was blowing itself out at the end of a
tumultuous few days for US and world financial markets.
HURRICANE Andrew, claimed to be the costliest natural disaster in US
history, yesterday smashed its way through the state of Louisiana,
inflicting severe damage on rural communities but narrowly missing the
low-lying city of New Orleans.
A substantial part of America's oil refining industry is concentrated on the
Gulf coast, in Louisiana and Texas, and officials there were reviewing
emergency plans to curtail or shut down plant operations.
A hurricane warning was in effect yesterday along 470 miles of Gulf coast
from Pascagoula, Mississippi, to Galvestone, Texas.
Lord Airlie, the chairman who was addressing an extraordinary shareholders'
meeting, said: 'On the basis of emerging information, General Accident
advise that the losses to their US operations arising from Hurricane Andrew,
which struck Florida and Louisiana, might in total reach the level at which
external catastrophe reinsurance covers would become exposed'.
Travellers said it had flown 50 claims
adjusters in to Florida late on Monday and was assessing losses.
According to Balcombe Group, a UK-based claims adjustment firm, other
insurers with large exposure in the hurricane-hit area are Hartford
Insurance, Aetna and Travellers.
The hurricane tore through southern Florida early on Monday morning, causing
billions of dollars of property damage and at least 12 deaths, and yesterday
was moving north-west across the Gulf of Mexico with winds of about 140
miles an hour.
While there were plenty of reasons for the dealers to sell the dollar, the
logic for such a strongly negative reaction from bond and stock markets was
less obviously compelling.
The dollar put paid to those hopes and, by the middle of this week, it was
approaching 7.45 per cent, putting an upward pressure on the all-important
mortgage rate for home-buyers.
Several forecasting agencies suggested the likeliest landfall was in central
Louisiana, to the west of New Orleans, possibly late last night or this
morning.
