SQUADS of workers fanned out across storm-battered Louisiana yesterday to
begin a massive rebuilding effort after Hurricane Andrew had flattened whole
districts, killing two people and injuring dozens more, agencies report from
Florida and New Orleans. However, local officials in Florida, hit earlier in the week by the
hurricane, were critical of what they called a delay in supplying food,
drinking water and other supplies for thousands of people in need. Federal emergency officials acknowledged distribution problems,
Transportation Secretary Andrew Card yesterday promised 'dramatic'
improvements within 24 hours and President George Bush last night ordered
troops to Florida, without specifying a number. The government estimated it would cost Dollars 20bn-Dollars 30bn to tidy and
rebuild in Florida, and to care for residents displaced by the storm. Louisiana state officials said they had no overall count of storm-related
injuries but initial estimates reckoned fewer than 100. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency said it was setting aside Dollars 77m to help
Louisiana recover. Most of the storm's fury was spent against sparsely populated farming
communities and swampland in the state, sparing it the widespread
destruction caused in Florida, where 15 people died. Official estimates in Miami reported that the hurricane had wiped out the
homes of one Dade County resident in eight - a quarter of a million people. Andrew had become little more than a strong rainstorm early yesterday,
moving across Mississippi state and heading for the north-eastern US. Several of Louisiana's main industries were affected, including those of
oysters and alligators. Wildlife and fisheries secretary Joe Herring
estimated a 50 per cent decline in the alligator industry. The cotton and
sugar-cane crops were threatened, the state agriculture department said. Most Louisiana oil refineries, however, were barely affected and deliveries
of crude oil were expected to resume yesterday. US CITIES along the Gulf of Mexico from Alabama to eastern Texas were on
storm watch last night as Hurricane Andrew headed west after sweeping across
southern Florida, causing at least eight deaths and severe property damage. The hurricane was one of the fiercest in the US in decades and the first to
hit Miami directly in a quarter of a century. In the Bahamas, government
spokesman Mr Jimmy Curry said four deaths had been reported on outlying
eastern islands. Mr Justin Balcombe, of UK-based insurance adjuster Balcombe Group, said
total losses could exceed Dollars 15bn if business interruption claims were
taken into account. That compares with the Dollars 4bn-Dollars 6n (Pounds
2.1bn-Pounds 3.1bn) of insurance industry losses caused by the last big US
hurricane, Hugo, which hit South Carolina in 1989. The brunt of the losses are likely to be concentrated among US insurers,
industry analysts said yesterday. Mr George Lloyd-Roberts, chairman of Lloyd's Underwriters' Non-Marine
Association, said that, unless damage claims exceeded Pounds 3bn, the
Lloyd's insurance market would feel little impact. Because the reinsurance
of reinsurance risk  - known as the retrocession market  - has shrunk
considerably in recent years, US insurers have placed far fewer of their
risks through Lloyd's. Mr Roger Hill, insurance analyst at Warburg Securities, said he estimated
that mainline UK insurers faced no more than Pounds 75m in damage claims so
far. 'At the moment we are relaxed about it,' he said. The real question, he
added, is the level of reinsurance available to the UK underwriters. Royal Insurance estimated the company's losses at no more than Pounds 20m. Among other UK insurers, Mr Hill estimated that General Accident may face
losses of up to Pounds 30m, while Guardian Royal Exchange faced Pounds 5m
and Sun Alliance and Commercial Union Pounds 10m each. However, Hurricane Andrew gathered fresh strength as it moved across the
Gulf of Mexico and there was concern last night that it might head towards
New Orleans, which is especially low lying and could suffer severe flood
damage. Scientists said the storm could make landfall anywhere between the Alabama
port of Mobile and the Louisiana-Texas border, probably tomorrow night or
early Thursday. It could threaten the large concentration of offshore oil production
facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. Shell Oil was evacuating most of the 900
workers on its offshore platforms as a precaution. A substantial part of America's oil refining industry is concentrated on the
Gulf coast, in Louisiana and Texas, and officials there were reviewing
emergency plans to curtail or shut down plant operations. Andrew, the first Caribbean hurricane of the season, hit the eastern coast
of Florida early yesterday, gusting up to 165mph. It ripped roofs off
houses, smashed cars and trucks, snapped power lines and uprooted trees
before heading out over the Gulf. A million people had been ordered to flee their homes in southern Florida as
the hurricane moved in from the Bahamas on Sunday. The Florida Power and
Light company said that about 1.2m of its customers, or 32 per cent, were
without power. Some of the strongest winds were in the affluent suburb of Coral Gables,
just south of Miami, where the National Hurricane Center is located. Its
radar and satellite antennae were blown away. President Bush authorised federal disaster assistance for the affected areas
and made plans for an inspection tour of the state. Picture, Page 14
 
DAMAGE CAUSED by Hurricane Andrew could rise to Dollars 20bn, it was
estimated yesterday, as one of the costliest US storms this century
threatened a further devastating landfall near the city of New Orleans. Government officials in Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas yesterday advised
or ordered more than 2m people to evacuate coastal areas. The hurricane tore through southern Florida early on Monday morning, causing
billions of dollars of property damage and at least 12 deaths, and yesterday
was moving north-west across the Gulf of Mexico with winds of about 140
miles an hour. At least three people died on Sunday when Hurricane Andrew crossed the
Bahamas. Ms Kate Hale, director of emergency services in Florida's Dade County, which
bore the brunt of the storm, estimated that Andrew had already caused
Dollars 15bn to Dollars 20bn (Pounds 7.5bn-Pounds 10bn) of damage. However, insurance industry analysts cautioned that it was too early to
assess the costs accurately. The US industry's Property Claims Service, the
official compiler of disaster losses, had yet to compile a preliminary tally
of the Florida bill. A hurricane warning was in effect yesterday along 470 miles of Gulf coast
from Pascagoula, Mississippi, to Galvestone, Texas. Several forecasting agencies suggested the likeliest landfall was in central
Louisiana, to the west of New Orleans, possibly late last night or this
morning. New Orleans, with a population of 1.6m, is particularly vulnerable because
the city lies below sea level, has the Mississippi River running through its
centre and a large lake immediately to the north. Much of America's oil refining industry is concentrated along coastal Texas
and Louisiana and several refineries were yesterday partially shut down. These included British Petroleum's Belle Chasse plant in Louisiana. In Florida, Andrew caused greatest havoc in a largely suburban swathe some
10-15 miles south of Miami. The town of Homestead, near the centre of the
storm, was largely flattened, including a local air force base. Miami's city centre escaped with relatively light damage. More than 24 hours
after the hurricane, some 825,000 households and businesses were still
without power. The brunt of insurance claims from the Florida storm will fall on the US
industry, and companies with a heavy local exposure include the State Farm
Group and the Allstate Insurance unit of Sears Roebuck. These are also the
leading property/casualty and home insurance groups in Louisiana, together
with American International Group. A spokesman for State Farm Insurance said he believed the company had
roughly 20 per cent of the Florida market. The mutually-owned company has no
reinsurance. Its size has made obtaining reinsurance cover difficult and its
reserves, at about Dollars 24bn, have made it unnecessary. According to Balcombe Group, a UK-based claims adjustment firm, other
insurers with large exposure in the hurricane-hit area are Hartford
Insurance, Aetna and Travellers. Travellers said it had flown 50 claims
adjusters in to Florida late on Monday and was assessing losses. About 12
per cent of Travellers' home insurance premium income came from Florida last
year, and 4.6 per cent of its commercial insurance premiums. The last serious US hurricane, Hugo, which struck South Carolina in 1989,
cost the industry Dollars 4.2bn from insured losses, though estimates of the
total damage caused ranged between Dollars 6bn and Dollars 10bn. GENERAL ACCIDENT, the leading British insurer, said yesterday that insurance
claims arising from Hurricane Andrew could 'cost it as much as Dollars 40m.' Lord Airlie, the chairman who was addressing an extraordinary shareholders'
meeting, said: 'On the basis of emerging information, General Accident
advise that the losses to their US operations arising from Hurricane Andrew,
which struck Florida and Louisiana, might in total reach the level at which
external catastrophe reinsurance covers would become exposed'. What this means is that GA is able to pass on its losses to external
reinsurers once a certain claims threshold has been breached. It believes this threshold may be breached in respect of Hurricane Andrew
claims. However, if this happens, it would suffer a post-tax loss of Dollars 40m
(Pounds 20m). Mr Nelson Robertson, GA's chief general manager, explained later that the
company has a  1/2 per cent share of the Florida market. The company's loss adjusters are in the area trying to estimate the losses. Their guess is that losses to be faced by all insurers may total more than
Dollars 8bn. Not all damaged property in the area is insured and there have been
estimates that the storm caused more than Dollars 20bn of damage. However, other insurers have estimated that losses could be as low as
Dollars 1bn in total. Mr Robertson said: 'No one knows at this time what the exact loss is'. WHILE Hurricane Andrew was wreaking havoc across large parts of southern
Florida and Louisiana this week, a grade two dollar crisis (on a one-to-four
scale, four being most severe) was blowing itself out at the end of a
tumultuous few days for US and world financial markets. On Wall Street, most of the damage from the currency storm was inflicted a
week ago Friday and on the following Monday, when bond yields jumped sharply
and the Dow Jones industrial average plunged by more than 75 points. The flimsy walls erected hastily by the Federal Reserve and other big
central banks to protect the vulnerable dollar from a tidal wave of selling
on foreign exchange markets failed to hold; and as the sellers poured
through the breached barricades, the currency dropped to DM1.40. This was
its lowest-ever point against the D-mark. The conditions necessary for a dollar crisis had been building up in
currency markets for some time. Interest rate differentials between US and
Germany widened over the summer as the Fed eased, and the Bundesbank
tightened, their respective monetary policies. The failure of the US economy to climb out of recession with any vigour was
also making overseas investors increasingly unhappy about holding the
dollar. So, too, was the political hole President Bush had dug for himself in a
re-election battle that only a year ago was supposed to be a shoo-in for the
incumbent. Moreover, the fact that almost every central bank worth its salt was in the
markets trying to prop up the dollar served only to convince foreign
exchange dealers that the currency was heading in one direction  - down. While there were plenty of reasons for the dealers to sell the dollar, the
logic for such a strongly negative reaction from bond and stock markets was
less obviously compelling. There are two standard explanations why a weak dollar prompts bond prices to
fall. The first is that it raises import prices and, as a result, adds to
inflationary pressures. The second is that it makes it hard for the Fed to engineer another cut in
interest rates to stimulate the flagging recovery, and raises the
possibility that rates may actually have to go up to protect the currency. The first explanation is not particularly convincing - imports account for
not much more than 10 per cent of US gross domestic product, so higher
import prices do not greatly effect the overall price level, which is now
around 3 per cent and heading lower. The second explanation carries more weight. Although there is not much
chance, given the present economic and political climate, that the Fed will
raise rates to help the dollar, there is little doubt that the currency's
weakness makes it extremely difficult for the Fed to ease monetary policy
again. The fear that the Fed may be done with interest rate cuts for the present
economic cycle was also behind the selling in equity markets. But investors
in stocks were equally, if not more, troubled by the rise in bond yields. Just over a week ago, the yield on the benchmark 30-year bond, which has
remained stubbornly high all year despite the poor state of the economy,
looked as if it might drop below 7.3 per cent. The dollar put paid to those hopes and, by the middle of this week, it was
approaching 7.45 per cent, putting an upward pressure on the all-important
mortgage rate for home-buyers. The dollar was not the only story in financial markets this week, and the
devastating effect of Hurricane Andrew produced a typically hard-eyed,
although nonetheless logical, reaction from Wall Street. The stocks of those insurance companies with the greatest exposure in
southern Florida, the area hit worst by the hurricane, all took a tumble. But the relatively modest losses in Geico, Travelers and Progressive
suggested that the market believed the insurers were reserved or reinsured
adequately enough to cover hurricane-related claims. The flip side of the hurricane's coin was a strong showing from the stocks
of home construction companies expected to benefit from demand for
rebuilding damaged or destroyed homes. Since there are an estimated 250,000
people left homeless by the storm, there is a lot of work to be done. The biggest gains among construction stocks this week were posted by Lennar,
Oakwood Homes, Engle Homes and Fleetwood, the largest maker of
pre-manufactured homes in the US. HURRICANE Andrew, claimed to be the costliest natural disaster in US
history, yesterday smashed its way through the state of Louisiana,
inflicting severe damage on rural communities but narrowly missing the
low-lying city of New Orleans. The storm, which brought havoc to southern Florida on Monday and then headed
north-west across the Gulf of Mexico, had made landfall late on Tuesday
night some 60 miles south-west of the city in the agricultural Cajun
country. Although the damage from the hurricane's landfall in Florida on Monday was
much greater than initially esti mated, insurers' losses there are likely to
total less than Dollars 1bn, well below earlier expectations, a senior
member of Lloyd's insurance market said yesterday. In Louisiana, the hurricane landed with wind speeds of about 120 miles per
hour and caused severe damage in small coastal centres such as Morgan City,
Franklin and New Iberia. Associated tornadoes devastated Laplace, 20 miles
west of New Orleans. Then, however, Andrew lost force as it moved north over land. By yesterday
afternoon, it had been down-graded to tropical storm, in that its sustained
windspeeds were below 75 mph. Initial reports said at least one person had died, 75 been injured and
thousands made homeless along the Louisiana coast, after 14 confirmed deaths
in Florida and three in the Bahamas. The storm caused little damage to Louisiana's important oil-refining
industry, although some plants had to halt production when electricity was
cut. The Lloyd's member, in close contact with leading insurers in Florida, said
that damage to insured property was remarkably small. More than Dollars 15bn
of damage may have been caused in all, but was mostly to uninsured property,
he said. Worst affected is one hotel, whose
basement was flooded. Most of the destruction occurred in a 10-mile band
across Homestead, 25 miles to the south of Miami, where a typical house
sells for Dollars 100,000 to Dollars 150,000. US insurers will face a bill
in respect of such properties, but Lloyd's exposure there is minimal. Many destroyed power lines are thought to be uninsured, as are trees and
shrubs uprooted across a wide area. Only one big hotel in that area has been
badly damaged, a Holiday Inn. Across Florida, some 2m people remained without electric ity yesterday and
health officials were warning the public to boil or chemically treat all
water. Hurricane Hugo, which devastated much of South Carolina in 1989, cost the
insurance industry some Dollars 4.2bn. Further uninsured losses may have
raised the total to Dollars 6bn-Dollars 10bn.
