We have to look forward and be
prepared."
We could even reach the stage where
Britain remains outside the currency alignment but employees ask
to be paid in euro."
Eurostat, the statistical bureau of the European community, is
responsible for this euro-related information program and the euro
data will be updated on a daily basis.
Those who believe that the EMU will be a success cite low
interest rates, low unemployment and low inflation as benefits of
the planned single currency.
Germany is in "an advanced stage" of experimenting striking the
euro, while other European nations which will join euro are due to
begin producing the coin next year.
The European summit confirmed Sunday that Belgium, Germany,
Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Austria, Portugal and Finland will be founding members of the Euro
organization.
The Frankfurt-based body said in its annual report released
today that it has decided on two themes for the new
currency: history of European civilization and abstract or
concrete paintings.
The Euro must also be counterfeit-proof and must include
special designs to accommodate blind or poor-sighted
people.
BNR indicative exchange rates will be modified to
include euro instead of the current European single currency, the
ECU.
In countries such as Sweden, France, Spain, Italy, Greece and
Portugal, more than 80 percent people feel to be "not very well
informed" or "not at all informed".
The single currency will be also used in the
reports issued by the General Directorate of Monetary and Hard
Currency Policy, he added.
Meanwhile, the euro will be used to replace the German mark as
the accounting unit for Bulgaria's foreign exchange reserve.
Abraham Mwenda, director of financial markets of Bank of
Zambia, said that if the EU comes up with one single
Euro-currency this will make it easy for Zambia to deal with one
currency and help reduce costs, according to Financial Mail.
As a result, they possibly wouldn't be able to do transactions
in Euro from the day it takes effect.
Both the European Parliament and the European council of
economy and finance ministers have approved the recommendation of
the European Commission that Belgium, Germany, Spain, France,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal and
Finland be the founding countries.
BONN, April 20 (Xinhua) -- Private investors are set to benefit
from the 1999 introduction of the single European currency, the
euro, thanks to expanded investment opportunities, reduced
currency risks, and rising competitions, the German central bank
Bundesbank said Monday.
Romanian bankers and economists could not be indifferent to the
future of Euro in the international payment system and as a
reserve currency, the evolution of the Euro-Dollar exchange rate,
the relations which will be established between the national
currency Leu and Euro, or Euro's effect on Romanian commercial and
payments balance, Isarescu said at a Wednesday colloquium on Euro
by the Romanian Society of Economics.
The actual banknotes and coins will be introduced over a
six-month period starting January 1, 2002, after which the
participants' present national currencies will cease to be legal
tender.
