Lending giants in Britain have put detailed plans in place for
financial life in the country after 1999, when they believe
European currencies will join in a single currency, the euro, with
the UK forced to accompany them within several years. We have to look forward and be
prepared." We could even reach the stage where
Britain remains outside the currency alignment but employees ask
to be paid in euro." Eurostat, the statistical bureau of the European community, is
responsible for this euro-related information program and the euro
data will be updated on a daily basis. He added that the statistics would be updated at noon every
day, a significant improvement on Eurostat's service. The other top topic is the rights for
being a European citizen. Those who believe that the EMU will be a success cite low
interest rates, low unemployment and low inflation as benefits of
the planned single currency. It is
firstly and mainly a political plan for us." Many people worry that the tough budgetary criteria for the
single currency will cause rising unemployment and worsening
social welfare. In view of these confusions, Juppe gave a clear-cut answer by
saying in the speech that only a single currency can guarantee
currency stability, which means "lower interest rates, sustained
economic growth and good prospects of employment." Juppe demanded French leaders make efforts to eliminate the
confusions. The Euro will be launched on January 1, 1999. It also asked banks to ensure their information system's
Euro-compliance. Besides France, only Finland, Belgium and Spain have begun
their production of the euros, but not as much as France, said AFP
quoting official sources. Germany is in "an advanced stage" of experimenting striking the
euro, while other European nations which will join euro are due to
begin producing the coin next year. BEIJING, May 5 (Xinhua) -- Foreign Ministry Spokesman Zhu
Bangzao said here today that the Chinese government welcomes the
initiation of the Euro currency early next year. The European summit confirmed Sunday that Belgium, Germany,
Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Austria, Portugal and Finland will be founding members of the Euro
organization. BONN, April 2 (Xinhua) -- Despite skepticism about the actual
realization of a single European currency as scheduled on January
1, 1999, preparations for the design of the Euro note have already
begun. The Frankfurt-based body said in its annual report released
today that it has decided on two themes for the new
currency: history of European civilization and abstract or
concrete paintings. The Euro is expected to have seven notes with face values
ranging from five to 500. The Euro must also be counterfeit-proof and must include
special designs to accommodate blind or poor-sighted
people. BUCHAREST, December 15 (Xinhua) -- The Romanian banking system
is ready to perform services in the European single currency, the
euro, the Rompres news agency reported on Tuesday citing sources
from Romania's Central Bank. BNR indicative exchange rates will be modified to
include euro instead of the current European single currency, the
ECU. About the future European currency, 20 percent feel "well
informed", 79 percent feel to be not well informed. In countries such as Sweden, France, Spain, Italy, Greece and
Portugal, more than 80 percent people feel to be "not very well
informed" or "not at all informed". The single currency will be also used in the
reports issued by the General Directorate of Monetary and Hard
Currency Policy, he added. Under the new system, one German mark is equivalent to 1,000
Bulgarian lev. The mark has also been used for the settlement of
foreign exchange reserves. With regard to easing the accounting, the Bulgarian government
plans to print next year a new national currency, with a face
value of one lev equivalent to one Mark. Meanwhile, the euro will be used to replace the German mark as
the accounting unit for Bulgaria's foreign exchange reserve. Abraham Mwenda, director of financial markets of Bank of
Zambia, said that if the EU comes up with one single
Euro-currency this will make it easy for Zambia to deal with one
currency and help reduce costs, according to Financial Mail. Lushinga said the importance of the Euro-currency will depend
on Zambia's major trading partners. As a result, they possibly wouldn't be able to do transactions
in Euro from the day it takes effect. Both the European Parliament and the European council of
economy and finance ministers have approved the recommendation of
the European Commission that Belgium, Germany, Spain, France,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal and
Finland be the founding countries. BONN, April 20 (Xinhua) -- Private investors are set to benefit
from the 1999 introduction of the single European currency, the
euro, thanks to expanded investment opportunities, reduced
currency risks, and rising competitions, the German central bank
Bundesbank said Monday. Romanian bankers and economists could not be indifferent to the
future of Euro in the international payment system and as a
reserve currency, the evolution of the Euro-Dollar exchange rate,
the relations which will be established between the national
currency Leu and Euro, or Euro's effect on Romanian commercial and
payments balance, Isarescu said at a Wednesday colloquium on Euro
by the Romanian Society of Economics. BONN, September 11 (Xinhua) -- The mass printing of the
banknotes of the single European currency, the euro, would be
started at the beginning of 1999, the European Central Bank (ECB)
announced in Frankfurt Friday. The decision was made by the ECB's governing council during a
meeting in Frankfurt on Friday. The actual banknotes and coins will be introduced over a
six-month period starting January 1, 2002, after which the
participants' present national currencies will cease to be legal
tender. Germany already started to mint euro coins early August.
