Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton
pitched in to help check-out clerks at his store in this Florida
Panhandle city when an electronic glitch shut down the cash
registers.
Walton, known for his down-home style, made a surprise visit to
the store that later Tuesday staged a concert by country singer Jana
Jea in its parking lot.
He
also joined the singer on stage to sing a duet and led customers in
the Wal-Mart cheer.
When,
in 1985, Forbes magazine declared him America's richest entrepreneur, the
paparazzi descended on the obscure corner of Arkansas, mainly occupied by
chicken farmers, where Walton made his home.
Meanwhile, the competitive energy which Sam Walton applied to his business
is inescapable.
In one of many contributions from friends and family, Don
Soderquist, Wal-Mart's chief operating officer, tells of finding Sam one
Saturday morning on his hand and knees at the local Kmart store, analysing
his rival's stock.
And his wife, in a casual aside, notes that when the
couple was on holiday in Italy their luggage vanished while her husband was
off on a similar scouting mission.
Sam Walton was a salesman to the core, and seems to have packaged
himself with all the skill that he once applied to selling a gooey southern
sweet called Moon Pies.
Also on display at the center is the hula skirt that Sam Walton
donned for his ``dance on Wall Street,'' which he performed after
challenging the company to reach a record 8 percent pre-tax profit
in 1984.
He lost the lease on that one,
and relocated to Bentonville.
Walton ``said he wanted to put in about a dozen stores'' and
needed someone to tend the shop in Bentonville while he and his
brother built a chain of Ben Franklins, Bogle said in a recent
interview.
Don Shinkle, Wal-Mart's director of corporate and public
affairs, attributed Wal-Mart's success to its ``associates'' _ the
term for employees first coined in 1972 to stress that all Wal-Mart
employees are partners in the company _ and to Sam Walton's
leadership and knack for hiring the ``right person at the right
time.''
Although
Walton built up a small chain of Ben Franklin variety store franchises from
1945, it was not until 1962 that he opened his first Wal-Mart discount
store.
As early as the
1950s, Walton realised he was wasting too much time travelling and bought a
small aircraft to pilot between stores himself - something he continued to
do to the end of his life.
He spends less time in the office since
handing over most responsiblities to David Glass.
He calls Bentonville home, and that is special to us.''
``He feels any attention to Sam Walton is to the individual and
he prefers attention to Sam Walton (the founder of) the company,''
Shinkle said.
``They wanted to know about the stock and the company,'' said
Simpson, who works for Stephens Inc. ``You'd think that he'd be
living in New York or LA, not Bentonville, Arkansas.
SAM WALTON was arguably the most important retailer of his generation.
He would deliver pep-talks to employees extolling the virtues of thrift and
customer satisfaction, long before these became fashionable management
buzz-words.
