Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton
pitched in to help check-out clerks at his store in this Florida
Panhandle city when an electronic glitch shut down the cash
registers. ``People began recognizing him and coming up and greeting him,''
said store manager Paul Sively. ``He shook their hands and talked to
everyone he could. The registers were out for about 45 minutes, and
I don't think we had one customer complain.'' Walton, known for his down-home style, made a surprise visit to
the store that later Tuesday staged a concert by country singer Jana
Jea in its parking lot. Walton often attends promotional events for
his Arkansas-based chain, and Sively said he had suspected the boss
might make an appearance. Walton continued talking with customers during the concert. He
also joined the singer on stage to sing a duet and led customers in
the Wal-Mart cheer. ``He was up there saying, `Give me a W, give me an A,' and the
customers went right along with him,'' Sively said. ``He even got
down to do a cheerleader's squiggle.'' MADE IN AMERICA: MY STORY
By Sam Walton
Doubleday, Dollars 22.50. 269 pages
Being an American folk hero is a tricky assignment, as Ross Perot found out. The problem is that the great American public likes its boot-strap
entrepreneurs to be very rich and very upright. In a country where business
practices are not overly genteel, this is a tough combination to achieve. A
vast media circus, meanwhile, is quick to expose any flaws. Sam Walton, founder of the Wal-Mart chain of discount supermarkets who died
of cancer in April, negotiated these pitfalls much better than most. When,
in 1985, Forbes magazine declared him America's richest entrepreneur, the
paparazzi descended on the obscure corner of Arkansas, mainly occupied by
chicken farmers, where Walton made his home. What they found was a happily
married, much-liked billionaire who enjoyed quail hunting, breakfasted at
the local Holiday Inn, and drove a battered pick-up truck, minus two
hub-caps. So, to an extent, have the less
wholesome adventures of the four Walton children. But no one has ever been
able to make Sam himself look bad. The worst that has been said is that he
was rather dull. Walton is not about to dash anyone's illusions. Readers will either find his
autobiography lashed with 'good ol'' common-sense and a lot of harmless, if
charming, anecdotes. Or they will find it dreary and downbeat. Walton makes
no excuses: 'I realise this may sound boring to most you,' he writes at one
stage, 'but one of my best items ever was a mattress pad called a Bedmate . A few snippets are more revealing about the character. There cannot be many
billionaires who admit that they 'never learned handwriting too well' - and
have the guts to include a photograph which demonstrates the point. Meanwhile, the competitive energy which Sam Walton applied to his business
is inescapable. In one of many contributions from friends and family, Don
Soderquist, Wal-Mart's chief operating officer, tells of finding Sam one
Saturday morning on his hand and knees at the local Kmart store, analysing
his rival's stock. And his wife, in a casual aside, notes that when the
couple was on holiday in Italy their luggage vanished while her husband was
off on a similar scouting mission. But it is David Glass, Wal-Mart's current chief executive, who perhaps
captures the entrepreneurial Walton spirit best. Explaining the annual
contest in which Wal-Mart executives choose one 'volume producing item' to
promote, he recalls the time Sam (who usually won) selected minnow buckets
for carrying bait. Glass was more happily teamed with apple juice. ' So I
would go down to the stores, and get them to take that minnow bucket . . . put ice in it, ice down the juice and give away samples out of his minnow
bucket. I particularly did it in stores I knew (Sam) was going to visit. It
drove him crazy, and he got off that minnow bucket pretty quick . . . .' But the reader can't help feeling that the cosy yarns tell only half the
truth. Sam Walton was a salesman to the core, and seems to have packaged
himself with all the skill that he once applied to selling a gooey southern
sweet called Moon Pies. For the most part, this makes for an engaging, if one-dimensional, portrait. I had bought a bank in Bentonville, for about
about Dollars 300,000,' Walton remarks, for example, 'just a little old bank
with only about Dollars 3.5m in deposits. But it helped me learn a lot about
financing things.' Oh, come on Sam, is that the whole story? The real truth, one suspects, comes right at the end of the book - when
Walton admits that 'if I hadn't gotten sick, I doubt I would have written
this book'. But these are unlikely to be
circumstances which make for the most critical self-analysis. Forty years after Sam Walton first hung
out his shingle, Walton's 5&10 will reopen to show how a little
rural storekeeper built a discount retail empire. The center chronicles the rise of the nation's fastest-growing
discount chain, using displays and audio-video presentations. It
concentrates on how the free enterprise system works and how
Wal-Mart thrived when similar companies didn't. The window displays date back to the store's opening, with
Simplicity patterns and Johnson's Glo-Coat, a box of Dreft and some
Ivory Snow. Inside, an electronic map details the company's
1,500-plus store chain today. Also on display at the center is the hula skirt that Sam Walton
donned for his ``dance on Wall Street,'' which he performed after
challenging the company to reach a record 8 percent pre-tax profit
in 1984. Walton and his brother, Bud, opened the first Wal-Mart Discount
City in 1962. Both will be on hand for the opening, along with a
sprinkling of other dignitaries, including Gov. Bill Clinton, the
dedication speaker. Aside from the other displays and presentations, the center also
has a replica of Sam Walton's original office at the store,
including many fixtures he used 40 years ago. Also on display is a photograph of young Sam Walton, a fat-faced
baby born in Oklahoma in the 1920s. Typical of the Wal-Mart
outlook, Dust Bowl Oklahoma is termed ``a place to grow and to
dream'' in a video on the Walton family. After a stint with J.C. Penney Co. and the Army, he opened a Ben
Franklin store in Newport in 1945. He lost the lease on that one,
and relocated to Bentonville. Walton ``said he wanted to put in about a dozen stores'' and
needed someone to tend the shop in Bentonville while he and his
brother built a chain of Ben Franklins, Bogle said in a recent
interview. That's when Bogle found himself in Walton's ``learn as you go''
training program. ``I got home at 10 o'clock that night after scrubbing and waxing
the floor with Sam,'' Bogle said. Inauspicious first impressions are part of the story. In one
video, David Glass, who succeeded Sam Walton as chief executive of
Wal-Mart in 1988, recalled his impressions after attending the
opening of the second Wal-Mart Discount City at Harrison in 1964. The first store, at Rogers, opened two years earlier. ``I thought to myself this is absolutely the worst discount
store, or retail store, I have ever seen,'' said Glass, who was
president of a drugstore chain at the time. And Wal-Mart Vice Chairman Donald Soderquist recalls that when
Walton took his idea of putting discount stores in rural areas to
Ben Franklin headquarters in Chicago, officials there ``just really
didn't see a future in it.'' Don Shinkle, Wal-Mart's director of corporate and public
affairs, attributed Wal-Mart's success to its ``associates'' _ the
term for employees first coined in 1972 to stress that all Wal-Mart
employees are partners in the company _ and to Sam Walton's
leadership and knack for hiring the ``right person at the right
time.'' At the start of 1990, Wal-Mart owned 1,402 stores, employed
272,000 and listed sales of $25.8 billion. Sam's Wholesale Club
closed out the year with 123 units and Wal-Mart announced plans to
enter the California market. The church-going
son of a farmer born in 1918 near Kingfisher, Oklahoma, he founded a store
chain which made him America's richest man, and which, shortly before his
death in 1992, became the world's biggest retailer. What is most startling about Wal-Mart is the speed of its growth. Although
Walton built up a small chain of Ben Franklin variety store franchises from
1945, it was not until 1962 that he opened his first Wal-Mart discount
store. Ten years
later, with 330 stores and Dollars 1.6bn sales, it was only the 33rd-biggest
retailer in the US. Its turnover was only 9 per cent of that of Sears
Roebuck, the biggest, and 11 per cent of K mart, the second-biggest. Within
another 10 years, Wal-Mart had overtaken them both. Apart from Walton's autobiography completed shortly before his death,
however, published material about the company is curiously scarce. Sam Walton did not invent discount retailing. Walton learned from them all, but was unique in taking his discount stores
into small towns of a few thousand people, where shoppers used to travelling
long distances were delighted to have a cut-price store nearby selling
everything they needed. As early as the
1950s, Walton realised he was wasting too much time travelling and bought a
small aircraft to pilot between stores himself - something he continued to
do to the end of his life. Sometimes, Walton was more reluctant to invest in technology, and had to be
persuaded by colleagues to introduce computers, and scanning at check-outs -
long before most retailers had recognised their importance - and to invest
Dollars 20m in an internal satellite communications system. This technology
helped Wal-Mart build one of the most efficient distribution systems of any
retailer. But perhaps the most fundamental reason for its success, the book
suggests, has been Wal-Mart's streamlined and highly responsive management
structure. Regional vice-presidents based at group headquarters in Bentonville,
Arkansas, rather than in costly regional offices, are despatched every
Monday by aircraft to their regions, spend the week visiting stores, working
with staff and managers, and return for a day-long merchandising meeting
every Friday. They discuss results, problems and suggestions from the week at a 7.30am
meeting on Saturdays and immediately afterwards call district managers to
relate the results. District managers hold a conference call with their
store managers, and before the day is out, the contents of the meeting have
been communicated to all store department heads. The system means employees can make suggestions to vice-presidents one week
and, if the idea is accepted by the Saturday meeting, see its implementation
begin the following week. Even the world's most successful retailer makes mistakes, however. One was
Walton's decision to stand down from the chairman and chief executive's role
in 1974 in favour of Ronald Mayer, only to return to both roles in 1976
after finding he was incapable of letting go of the reins. Another was
Wal-Mart's short-lived Hypermart format, which proved too big even for
gigantist America. The book also covers well the debate over whether Wal-Mart's impact on the
economies of small US towns was positive or negative. If there are criticisms, these are that this 'scholarly account' never quite
captures the sheer excitement of working in the world's fastest-growing
retailer. But this is a well-researched and accessible account of one man's success in
building his own American dream. The store manager of the Wal-Mart in this
community on the outskirts of Dallas tells a story that gives an
insight into the man considered responsible for a retailing
phenomenon. Manager Don Bost remembers one day last summer when a secretary
telephoned from Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s corporate headquarters in
Bentonville, Ark. Chairman Sam Walton was about to land at a nearby
airport and the secretary asked if someone could fetch him and bring
him to the De Soto store. Paying unexpected calls on stores is one way Walton has kept in
close touch with everyday goings-on. His example is followed by
other Wal-Mart executives and most make a point of spending a lot of
time in the field. By all accounts, Sam Walton's personality permeates operations
throughout the company. Everyone, from Wal-Mart President and Chief Operating Officer
David Glass down to an hourly store worker, can readily quote the
gospel according to Sam, as he is called. Rule No.2 says just in case the
customer's wrong, revert to rule No.1.'' If the principles sound old-fashioned and homespun, they are
because that's the way Sam is, people who know him say. He shuns the limelight that his company's success has shed on him
and has decided to refuse almost all press requests for interviews. He's happy to chat with folks in his stores, though. He also regularly reminds Wal-Mart ``associates'' that
hospitality to customers is crucial. He preaches it in person or via
high-tech satellite hookup with his stores. Wal-Mart employees became known as associates under a company
effort to prove it cared about employees, partly to thwart a union
organizing effort in the late 1960s. One of the most sensitive subjects for Walton is the fortune he's
amassed. A close associate says Sam would ``probably give anything'' not
to be named on Fortune magazine's list of the country's wealthiest
people. The magazine has estimated that his immediate family's stake
in Wal-Mart stock is worth about $6.8 billion. ``Sam Walton is more interested in his backhand than he is in his
bank account,'' says Don Shinkle, Wal-Mart spokesman. Samuel Moore Walton turns 71 on March 29. He was born in
Kingfisher, Okla., and grew up as the son of a farm-mortgage banker. He graduated from the University of Missouri with an economics
degree in 1940 and joined J.C. Penney Co. as a management trainee in
Des Moines, Iowa. After serving three years in the Army, he went to
Arkansas and opened a Ben Franklin five-and-dime store, eventually
becoming the company's biggest franchisee. The rest will probably earn an entry in the history of U.S.
retail trade. Bud is a senior vice president and board member of Wal-Mart. Three of the four grown children Sam and his wife Helen had are
involved with the company in various capacities. Sam hasn't slowed much, enjoying hunting and tennis as much as
ever, and is said not to suffer after effects from a bout with
leukemia, now in remission. He spends less time in the office since
handing over most responsiblities to David Glass. Glass doesn't hesitate when asked if Wal-Mart can flourish
without Sam. The Walton family will always be involved, he
adds. Commenting on the future, Glass says: ``We'll be judged on what
we produce today. Tomorrow, what we've done in the past won't
matter.'' He calls Bentonville home, and that is special to us.'' According to Forbes magazine's July 24
edition, the Walton family's estimated worth is $8.7 billion, up
from its 1988 estimate of $6.5 billion. Shinkle said he received about 10 calls from reporters Monday
morning, when the Forbes list appeared in newspapers. Shinkle said
news coverage about Walton ``usually sets off a press frenzy'' for
comments from him. But the 71-year-old businessman declined to
comment. ``He feels any attention to Sam Walton is to the individual and
he prefers attention to Sam Walton (the founder of) the company,''
Shinkle said. ``He very seldom schedules interviews about his feelings. It just
puts him in a position he doesn't want to be.'' But Walton occasionally offers peeks that reveal personal
modesty. Walton was first listed by Forbes as the nation's richest man in
October 1985. Three years ago, Forbes also began listing the world's
wealthiest people. Walton made that listing as the richest American
every year since. This year he ranks third, behind two Japanese
businessmen. He is out of the
office up to four days a week, the spokesman said. ``He spends most of his time talking to associates and
customers,'' Shinkle said, ``and he always comes back with many
ideas from them.'' Wal-Mart calls its sales help associates instead of employees. When Walton first made the Forbes list of richest Americans,
recalled Little Rock investment banker Warren Simpson, calls came in
from all over about the billionaire from the Ozarks. ``They wanted to know about the stock and the company,'' said
Simpson, who works for Stephens Inc. ``You'd think that he'd be
living in New York or LA, not Bentonville, Arkansas. ``When it comes out now, it's just, `Yeah, he's still there,'''
Simpson said. SAM WALTON was arguably the most important retailer of his generation. By 1991 the chain's sales had risen to nearly Dollars 44bn, making it the
world's largest retailer in terms of revenues, and the Walton family
probably America's richest. Wal-Mart now operates in 43 US states, selling goods ranging from detergents
to golf clubs. The chain's success stemmed both from Mr Walton's personality and
willingness to challenge accepted retailing orthodoxy. He would deliver pep-talks to employees extolling the virtues of thrift and
customer satisfaction, long before these became fashionable management
buzz-words. Employee satisfaction - an idea which is only now gaining wider acceptance
in US service industries - was also a vital ingredient in the Walton
philosophy. He buoyed staff morale with cheer-leading sessions, bonus payments for good
performance and profit-sharing plans which allowed some employees of very
modest means to retire relatively wealthy. 'Low prices always' became Wal-Mart's motto. Mr Walton also disproved the conventional wisdom that large discount stores
could not operate successfully in the small, rural towns of the US south.
