There were reports of injuries at Candlestick, where fans
were waiting for the World Series to begin, and the stadium was
evacuated, ABC-TV and Cable News Network reported.
The U.S. Geological Survey, in a 1988 report on regions of high earthquake 
probability in California, said there was a 30% chance of another 6.5-magnitude 
earthquake in the immediate vicinity by the year 2018.
Damage to 3rd Avenue overpass in San Mateo.
Private groups and officials from Tokyo to London to Charleston,
S.C., offered help to the ruptured San Francisco Bay area, but some
said relief for the earthquake could drain coffers already strained
by previous disasters.
``I am joining millions of Californians as we intensely watch
the damage of the large San Francisco earthquake,'' said Bradley.
At City Hall in San Francisco a radio reporter told listeners,
``The entire building started to shake ... you could hear people
yelling and screaming all over the building.''
It occurred at
5:04 p.m. PDT and was centered in the Santa Cruz, Calif., area, 75
miles south of San Francico on the Pacific Coast.
Then I saw falling glass, broken
glass on the street, but luckily not near me, `` said Les Galvacs
who was walking down Market Street in downtown San Francisco.
The quake was centered on the San Andreas segment described in
the article, but Tom Heaton, the scientist in charge of the U.S.
Geological Survey office in Pasadena, said it wasn't clear yet
whether it broke all or part of the 50-mile segment.
The epicenter of the quake was about 8 miles northeast of Santa
Cruz and 75 miles south of San Francisco.
The 1985 study, by Columbia University geology professor
Christopher Scholz, was among several that produced conflicting
estimates on the likelihood and size of the quake that finally
happened Tuesday.
Allen said many of the same kinds of older structures that
appeared to have been damaged in San Francisco also exist in the
Los Angeles region.
Still, at 
least 28 deaths in the Carolinas are blamed on Hugo, while at least 60 deaths 
have been attributed to the Bay Area earthquake.
"We lost no major economic area like the Bay Bridge," said Greenberg, who was 
once San Francisco's undersheriff and who returned with emergency supplies to 
help the Santa Cruz police. "
Greenberg, who has now watched the federal government respond to two of 
America's worst disasters, said he sees relatively few differences between how 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency worked in South Carolina and Northern 
California.
"There was no damage to our place or in our neighborhood," he said.
Throughout the Bay Area, residents were left to puzzle over why the earthquake 
savaged some buildings and bypassed others, much like San Francisco was left to 
wonder why the Marina District was hard hit and others spared.
The stadium was shaking and 
the special concrete joint -- one of several strategically spaced around the 
top of the stadium to prevent earthquake damage -- was doing was it was 
designed to do.
Most people stayed in their seats, waiting to hear whether the game would be 
postponed.
