Some buildings may have collapsed, said Police Officer D.
Collins. There were reports of injuries at Candlestick, where fans
were waiting for the World Series to begin, and the stadium was
evacuated, ABC-TV and Cable News Network reported. The preliminary reading was
from the Alaska Tsunami warning system, Caltech said. Televised footage of the bridge showed that a 30-foot section of
the span's upper deck had collapsed onto the bottom level. Fans at Candlestick screamed as the stadium swayed for about 15
seconds. Buildings in San Francisco swayed several feet. The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on
seismographs. Every increase of one number means a tenfold increase
in magnitude. Thus a reading of 7.5 reflects an earthquake 10 times
stronger than one of 6.5. An earthquake of 3.5 on the Richter scale can cause slight
damage in the local area, 4 moderate damage, 5 considerable damage,
6 severe damage. The San Francisco earthquake of 1906, which occurred before the
Richter scale was devised, has been estimated at 8.3 on the Richter
scale. The epicenter of the temblor, eight miles east-northeast of the city of Santa 
Cruz in the Santa Cruz Mountains, was at virtually the same spot as earthquakes 
in the 5-magnitude range that occurred on June 27, 1988, and Aug. 8, 1989. A 
6.5-magnitude quake was centered there in 1865. The U.S. Geological Survey, in a 1988 report on regions of high earthquake 
probability in California, said there was a 30% chance of another 6.5-magnitude 
earthquake in the immediate vicinity by the year 2018. But he joined Caltech 
scientists in saying that aftershocks as strong as 5.9 magnitude should be 
expected, and that the pattern of aftershocks could last for months. Jim Dewey, a research geophysicist at the National Earthquake Center, said 
preliminary evaluations indicated that the fracture was about 10 miles deep, 
and that the quake rupture extended about 30 miles south down the fault from 
the epicenter. But when 
a 5.1 earthquake did strike on the Calaveras in 1988, some earthquake 
scientists expressed concern that this could be the case. Between the late 1950s and 1979, there were no quakes of magnitude 5 or larger 
near the Bay Area. Iben Browning, of Sandia Park, N. M., said he had based his prediction on an 
assessment of tidal forces caused by the moon's relationship with the Earth. He 
said he had decided to keep the assessment private because he feared that 
publicity about it would cause people to panic. MAJOR QUAKE DAMAGE 


1 -- Major fires hit Marina District. 2 -- Civic Center area buildings damaged, a 4-story building south of Market 
collapsed, killing 5. 4 -- Embarcadero Freeway damaged and shut. 5 -- Interstate 280 from junction with Rt. 6 -- Candlestick Park damaged, evacuated. 7 -- San Francisco Airport closed, control tower reportedly in shambles. 8 -- Portion of San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge at eastern end collapsed; one 
person reported killed. 9 -- Bay Area Rapid Transit system shut down. 10 -- Double-decked portion of Interstate 880 (Nimitz Freeway) collapsed. Estimates were as high as 200 dead and hundreds injured. Damage to 3rd Avenue overpass in San Mateo. Portions of Interstate 280 closed in Los Altos due to buckling. Private groups and officials from Tokyo to London to Charleston,
S.C., offered help to the ruptured San Francisco Bay area, but some
said relief for the earthquake could drain coffers already strained
by previous disasters. ``I know we still have and will have great needs here and
charity certainly begins at home,'' Riley said. Leon Ferraez,
communications director of the Salvation Army. ``We're there the
minute the news is on.'' Los Angeles donated sonic equipment to help detect sounds of
people trapped in rubble. A French disaster relief
agency offered to send special teams of searchers. A team of British engineers were to fly to San Francisco today
to help assess structural damage from the quake. ``I am joining millions of Californians as we intensely watch
the damage of the large San Francisco earthquake,'' said Bradley. ``We all know the horrors of an earthquake and we express our
deep-felt sympathy for the people of the San Francisco Bay area.'' Even the Internal Revenue Service got into the act, announcing
it would waive penalties for taxpayers unable to file returns or
make scheduled payments because of the earthquake. President Bush directed $273 million in immediate aid for quake
victims and said he would visit the area Friday or Saturday. The Red Cross began its fiscal year July 1 with $18.5 million in
its disaster budget, and had spent 40 percent by September. Then
Hugo came along, triggering an effort the agency estimates will
cost $42 million _ the most ever. CBS-TV reported one person had been killed on the bridge. It was centered near Hollister, 80 miles southeast
of San Francisco in San Benito County. CBS said the California Highway Patrol reported a J.C. Penney
building in downtown Hollister collapsed and a bridge on Highway
101 in Hollister collapsed. San Francisco Airport was evacuated, and some people there were
hit with falling plaster. A huge plume of smoke visible for miles over Berkeley. Hundreds of people fled Bay Area Rapid Transit subway and
elevated stations in San Francisco and East Bay suburbs. Reports said most occupants got out of their cars safely. At City Hall in San Francisco a radio reporter told listeners,
``The entire building started to shake ... you could hear people
yelling and screaming all over the building.'' She said there were ``obvious problems'' at the health
department across the street. ``Water was literally gushing out of
the building from a window on the second floor,'' the unidentified
reporter said. It occurred at
5:04 p.m. PDT and was centered in the Santa Cruz, Calif., area, 75
miles south of San Francico on the Pacific Coast. The quake knocked out phones and power, including electricity at
The Associated Press bureau in San Francisco. Then I saw falling glass, broken
glass on the street, but luckily not near me, `` said Les Galvacs
who was walking down Market Street in downtown San Francisco. A man in Saratoga, southwest of San Jose, told a San Francisco
radio station, ``My house is OK, but everything in it is gone. An earthquake of 6 on the scale can cause severe damage. But studies in recent years have reminded the Bay Area that it
also faced another seismic disaster, and those studies became a
reality Tuesday when a quake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale
rocked the Bay area. The quake was centered on the San Andreas segment described in
the article, but Tom Heaton, the scientist in charge of the U.S.
Geological Survey office in Pasadena, said it wasn't clear yet
whether it broke all or part of the 50-mile segment. The epicenter of the quake was about 8 miles northeast of Santa
Cruz and 75 miles south of San Francisco. The 1985 study, by Columbia University geology professor
Christopher Scholz, was among several that produced conflicting
estimates on the likelihood and size of the quake that finally
happened Tuesday. Faced with conflicting estimates, the
Geological Survey issued a July 1988 report that it said
represented a consensus on the debate. Tuesday's jolt was centered within those southernmost 20 miles
of the fault segment. ``Clearly, scientists had identified this segment as a
particularly hazardous one,'' Heaton said. ``There was some debate
about the length of the rupture and the size of the earthquake.'' As bad as Tuesday's quake was, ``it was not a 1906 earthquake,''
Geological Survey director Dalas Peck said. ``The question is not whether a big earthquake is coming. ``This is not to say we predicted the earthquake. A quake of 7
magnitude, a ``major'' earthquake, is capable of widespread heavy
damage. Initial reports indicated widespread damage from Tuesday's
quake, especially affecting highways and old masonry buildings. ``It's not like an earthquake of this size in this area is a
calamitous event. Allen said many of the same kinds of older structures that
appeared to have been damaged in San Francisco also exist in the
Los Angeles region. There are dramatic similarities and profound differences in the ways these two 
cities were affected and altered in the first week after they were ravaged by 
two powerful forces of nature -- one that angrily swept across the land from 
the sea and one that violently rumbled beneath the earth. "From the standpoint of compassion, of all the people in America we can feel 
the hurt that the San Francisco area is going through the most," Charleston 
Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. said Sunday, one month after Hugo hit. " We know it 
means, at best, the disruption of normal life for some time and, at worst, the 
loss of life." Unlike earthquakes, hurricanes 
can be tracked by planes and radar, their paths predicted with sufficient 
certainty for those in harm's way to secure property and to flee. Still, at 
least 28 deaths in the Carolinas are blamed on Hugo, while at least 60 deaths 
have been attributed to the Bay Area earthquake. Hugo, 500 miles across with winds topping 175 m.p.h., Five days after the storm, many city 
residents remained inconvenienced, most without electricity, many without safe 
drinking water. Broken glass and other debris left 
the roadsides lined with cars stopped by flat tires. By contrast the streets in most of San Francisco were passable within a day of 
the earthquake. Electricity was largely restored overnight. And most broken 
natural gas lines were quickly repaired. We were gridlocked for two days because of the debris." It was more than 10 days before restaurants and 
other stores began to slowly reopen and twice as long for night life to begin 
to return. Tourism is a 
$2.5-billion-a-year business in San Francisco. It took almost three weeks for businesses that cater to tourists to get back on 
their feet in Charleston. In Charleston most of the damage could be quickly assessed. In 
San Francisco much of the damage may still be undetected. Water mains and gas 
lines weakened by the heaving earth may not break for weeks or months. Structural damage to houses, in many instances, will become apparent over a 
long period of time. "When a hurricane is over, it's over," Greenberg said. " Charleston also escaped widespread damage to its infrastructure. "We lost no major economic area like the Bay Bridge," said Greenberg, who was 
once San Francisco's undersheriff and who returned with emergency supplies to 
help the Santa Cruz police. " They're going to have humongous traffic problems." Hugo left Charleston isolated from the world. Even local residents were 
left without any information. Millions were watching the pregame World Series program when the earthquake 
struck, and instantly word was out that there had been a disaster. San 
Francisco stations were able to broadcast to residents who had battery-powered 
radios and TVs. Besides that black page in the ledger of history, both San Francisco and 
Charleston also have another experience in common: Both have experienced 
frustrating delays in getting disaster relief from the federal government. Greenberg, who has now watched the federal government respond to two of 
America's worst disasters, said he sees relatively few differences between how 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency worked in South Carolina and Northern 
California. "There's nothing that needs to be done in a hurry with them," he said. " They 
just plop along like one of the horses at Disneyland. They are repeating the mistakes of South Carolina in California." On Telegraph Hill, Jerry Lubenow got his biggest shock when he arrived at his 
apartment after the deadly earthquake. "There was no damage to our place or in our neighborhood," he said. The only thing Lubenow could figure out was that "Telegraph Hill is on rock." He then talked to friends who live on Nob Hill and Russian Hill, which are also 
situated on rock, and learned that their residences also avoided damage. "You almost feel guilty," he said, referring to his own good fortune. "( It's) 
like living through the blitz in London in the Second World War." Only a few miles away in San Francisco's affluent Marina District, dozens of 
fashionable townhouses were damaged or destroyed. Some buckled and pitched 
forward off their foundations into the street. Others appeared outwardly sound 
but sustained interior damage that rendered them uninhabitable. Why did some of the luxury, four-story apartment buildings collapse at the 
Marina while in nearby Chinatown, shops made of unreinforced masonry sustained 
little damage in the 6.9 temblor? The soil beneath the Marina District, where six buildings burned down or 
collapsed, is made up of landfill partly dredged from the bay more than 70 
years ago. "What collapsed and killed some people were four-story apartment buildings that 
had garages built all the way along the bottom (floor)," Yanev said. " So, you 
have a bunch of garages underneath all these apartments. You effectively have 
no walls on one side of the building. Yanev called the two conditions a "disaster waiting to happen." Experts said they did not anticipate that the Marina District would be the 
major problem in an earthquake. In the city's high-rise office towers, a few broken windows and other cosmetic 
damage could be seen. But most buildings, including the landmark 
Transamerica Pyramid, were not touched. In smaller buildings, he said, contractors usually make sure that vertical 
forces -- such as snow and ice -- cannot force a structure to collapse. Throughout the Bay Area, residents were left to puzzle over why the earthquake 
savaged some buildings and bypassed others, much like San Francisco was left to 
wonder why the Marina District was hard hit and others spared. In Santa Cruz, initial damages were estimated at $350 million, and 30% of the 
downtown mall -- the heart of the city -- was severely damaged. An estimated 20 
commercial buildings must be razed, a county official said. Several dozen Victorian homes were shifted off their 
foundations, and numerous chimneys crumbled. "Some of the buildings are extremely hazardous," Assistant Fire Chief Frank 
Blackburn said. " They are four-story buildings above garages. All they had were 
vertical columns holding up the structures. If you picture a building sitting 
on columns with no lateral support on those columns, when you get sideways 
motion, the buildings slide left and right." Blackburn said many residents are not going to be able to get their belongings 
out. Buildings collapsed like cakes without yeast. Anyone who was alive in 1963 remembers where he was when President Kennedy was 
assassinated. I was in a trailer just outside the stadium, about to watch the telecast when 
the earthquake hit. It was shortly after the network went on the air. I opened the door to the trailer and looked out. The stadium was shaking and 
the special concrete joint -- one of several strategically spaced around the 
top of the stadium to prevent earthquake damage -- was doing was it was 
designed to do. It was opening and closing as if the place was made of 
cardboard instead of concrete. A few people were running out of the stadium, but there did not seem to be 
great alarm, because the quake did not last long. I walked into the stadium to interview fans. Most people stayed in their seats, waiting to hear whether the game would be 
postponed. We're just now figuring out bits and pieces of this 
disaster." -- "It was like somebody slugging a punching bag. Usually earthquakes pass, but 
this one went on and on. Schoolteacher Flora Churnin, who was at her Silicon Valley town of Sunnyvale 
when the earthquake struck. Suzyn Waldman, a reporter covering the World Series at 
Candlestick Park for a New York radio station.
