The Honduran 
president closed schools and public offices on the coast Monday and 
ordered all air force planes and helicopters to evacuate people from 
the Islas de la Bahia, a string of small islands off the country's 
central coast. Maria 
Gonzalez said she needed the gas to cook with when her firewood gets 
wet. In El Progreso, 
100 miles (160 kilometers) north of the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa, 
the army evacuated more than 5,000 people who live in low-lying banana 
plantations along the Ulua River, said Nolly Soliman, a resident. That meant the Honduran coast had been under hurricane 
conditions for more than a day. The cable television company 
was broadcasting only The Weather Channel. ``It's been horrible,'' 
said Montgomery, as she and her friend drank cocktails at an outdoor 
restaurant. At least 231 people have been confirmed dead in Honduras from former-hurricane 
Mitch, bringing the storm's death toll in the region to 357, the National 
Emergency Commission said Saturday. By late 
Sunday, Mitch's winds, once near 180 mph (290 kph), had dropped to 
near 30 mph (50 kph), and the storm _ now classified as a tropical 
depression _ was near Tapachula, on Mexico's southern Pacific coast 
near the Guatemalan border. That is in addition to least another 600 people elsewhere in the country, 
Bolanos said. BRUSSELS, Belgium (AP) - The European Union on Tuesday approved 6.4 
million European currency units (dlrs 7.7 million) in aid for thousands 
of victims of the devastation caused by Hurricane Mitch in Central 
America. But its own regional affiliate in 
San Miguel province reported 125 dead there alone. President Carlos Flores declared Hurricane Mitch had 
set back Honduras' development by 50 years. As of 
Thursday, Mitch had killed 6,076 people in Honduras _ down from officials' 
earlier estimate of 7,000. ``Until now, we have had a short amount of time and few resources 
to get reliable information.'' Honduran authorities still don't know how many shelters 
have been set up across the Central American country. The estimated 
number of homeless dropped from 580,000 to 569,000 Thursday. ``We have to vaccinate the children,'' said 
Dr. Mario Soto, who has treated at least 300 children at the shelter 
for diarrhea, conjunctivitis and bacterial infections. In many 
nearby villages, residents have gone days without potable water or 
food. A 7-month-old baby died in the village of Olvido after three 
days without food. ``It's a coincidence that the ships 
are there but they've got men and equipment that can be put to work 
in an organized way,'' said International Development Secretary Clare 
Short.
