Federal lawmaker Johannes Gerster said refusal to turn over the
deposed East German leader for trial could ``burden'' Bonn and
Moscow's ``outstanding relations,'' the Neue Osnabruecker Zeitung
newspaper reported. He is accused of issuing shoot-to-kill
orders to East German guards at the now-fallen Berlin Wall. Honecker has denied all charges against him, including that he
was personally responsible for the estimated 200 people who died
trying to escape his repressive government. He has taken refuge at a Soviet military hospital in Beelitz,
outside Berlin. ``I demand that the Soviet government immediately release Erich
Honecker and extradite him to German justice officials,'' the
Osnabrueck newspaper quoted Gerster, a member of Kohl's Christian
Democrats, as saying. Honecker's fate is one of the first issues facing Bonn and
Moscow since they signed several treaties designed to draw the two
nations closer together. East Germany's ousted secret police
chief threatened to break former Communist leader Erich Honecker's
neck when the two faced each other in jail, a West German newspaper
reported Wednesday. 82-year-old former security chief Erich Mielke
shouted at Honecker, according to Bild newspaper. Mielke also screamed at Honecker ``I'll break your neck!'' Honecker, 78, was jailed for one day in
January. Honecker was released from jail for
health reasons. West German authorities on Tuesday opened a criminal
investigation of Mielke. He is suspected of giving sanctuary to
members of West Germany's leftist terrorist group, the Red Army
Faction, and of setting up contacts between the group and
Palestinian guerrillas. Honecker is also the target of several criminal investigations,
one in West Germany for obstruction of justice. Bild said the imprisoned Mielke also accused other former
Communist officials of betrayal and threatened to retaliate against
them. One prison warden told Bild that many of the guards had worked
for Mielke's Stasi and that they might interpret his threat against
Honecker as an order to kill the former Communist chief. Bild said Mielke and other members of Honecker's ruling circle
will be moved to a West Berlin prison after German unification on
Oct. 3. Honecker also will be moved to the same jail if his health
improves enough for him to be imprisoned. He is suffering from
kidney cancer and is being kept at a Soviet military hospital
oustide East Berlin. ADN, quoting a Health Ministry statement, said Honecker was
still recovering from surgery for kidney cancer in January and was
not well enough to be incarcerated. But a medical exam by a team of doctors found him in condition
to be questioned and to stand trial, ADN said. Honecker, 77, ruled East Germany for 19 years until he was
ousted in October as a wave of pro-democracy demonstrations swept
the country, leading to the peaceful overthrow of the Communist
government and the opening of the Berlin Wall. The medical panel concluded that seven other former Communist
officials, who had been among Honecker's closest aides, were all
fit to prosecute and to be placed in custody, ADN said. It said former secret police chief Erich Mielke, former
economics czar Guenter Mittag and former labor chief Harry Tisch
were under arrest, while the other four remained free. All three
had been members of the ruling Politburo under Honecker. Honecker and the seven are charged with corruption and abuse of
office. They had been arrested soon after Honecker's fall but were
later released because of advanced age and poor health. Honecker has been staying at a Soviet military hospital outside
East Berlin. ADN quoted Federal Prosecutor Guenter Seidel as saying he
intended to continue his investigation against the former East
German leaders, although their poor health often disrupted the
proceedings. Germany wants to try him for ordering the shooting of people who attempted
to flee to the West during his years in power. But speculation lingers that
German politicians have little real interest in trying a man who may possess
embarrassing secrets.; "Let's forget about the issue of Erich Honecker for
several days. But Tass quoted Gorbachev as saying he did not exclude the
possibility that Honecker would leave Russia for North Korea in the next few
days.; Gorbachev had served as Honecker's protector until the Soviet
leader's political fortunes declined. North Korean and Russian
diplomats confirmed that talks were held Tuesday about a North Korean offer
for Honecker to travel to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, for medical
treatment.; But he said his country was still awaiting
a positive reply from the Russian government on the offer to accept Honecker. The Russian Foreign Ministry said it had not yet formulated a response.; Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker, who
is expected to be indicted for high treason, was arrested Monday
morning upon release from a hospital and taken to prison, the
official news agency ADN said. Honecker was immediately taken to East Berlin's Rummelsburg
prison, the brief dispatch said. Honecker joins other members of
his ousted Politburo already in prison awaiting trial. Earlier this month, East German prosecutors said Honecker and
former state security chief Erich Mielke would be charged with
treason and corruption charges for misuse of their positions and
state funds. ADN said that the director of Charite urology clinic, Dr. Peter
Althaus, repeated on Monday that in his opinion Honecker was still
not well enough to be jailed. On Sunday, West Germany's mass-circulation Bild newspaper said
Honecker would be arrested, but that he would be held at a prison
hospital because of his condition. ADN made not mention if
Rummelsburg prison was equipped with a medical facility. Earlier this month, East Germany's Luthern Church had offered to
put Honecker up in a home for the aged upon his release from the
hospital. Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker will
not stand trial in East Germany as long as the formerly Communist
country exists, a West German newspaper reported. Bild quoted Guenter Seidel, an East German prosecutor, as saying
that Honecker had used $42 million for stocking a private housing
estate for leaders of the former Communist government. Negotiators are still working out the merger of the two German
legal systems. Honecker is in poor health and remains confined to a Soviet
military hospital in Beelitz outside East Berlin. I am a dead man,'' Bild quoted Mielke, 82, as
saying at his last interrogation. Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker was
arrested and taken to prison today, and a prosecutor said he will
tried for high treason in March. Chief Prosecutor Hans-Juergen Joseph told Parliament that
Honecker and former Politburo members Erich Mielke, Guenter Mittag
and Joachim Herrmann would be tried by the Supreme Court on treason
charges in March. All four have been expelled from the party. Mielke was Honecker's security chief, Mittag oversaw the economy
and Herrmann headed the party's propaganda department. Eleven
members of Honecker's ousted Politburo already are in prison
awaiting trial. Vogel is
East Germany's most prominent lawyer. West German television showed an impassive Honecker being led
out of the hospital by his wife, Margot, in pre-dawn darkness. She
kissed him goodbye before he was taken away in a large limousine. The charge of high treason carries a maximum life imprisonment. The conviction used to carry the death penalty, but that was
abolished in reforms that followed Honecker's ouster Oct. 18. East Germany has been caught up in a virtual frenzy to root out
corruption and abuse of office. Honecker, the aging hard-line Stalinist leader who ruled East
Germany for 18 years, had previously been declared too ill to
withstand imprisonment. ``There was the notion in the former party leadership that
everything outside of planned events and demonstrations staged by
the Communist youth group was an action organized by enemy
forces,'' Krenz told an investigating commission in East Berlin. The testimony was broadcast on East German television. Schabowski said Honecker had personally ordered police attacks
against demonstrators in early October, working closely with his
then-secret police chief, Erich Mielke. ``Honecker took things into his own hands,'' Schabowski said. ``All decisions and orders that led to the police actions against
demonstrators and to their arrrest went exclusively through
Honecker and Mielke.'' Like Krenz, Schabowski denied any personal responsibility for
the orders to attack the demonstrators in the capital. ``Then-general secretary Erich Honecker and the internal
security chief Erich Mielke immediately after each session of the
Politburo consulted with each other on the security situation of
the German Democratic Republic,'' Krenz said. Honecker and Mielke are now targeted for an indictment for high
treason. The uprising was a
turning point that speeded Honecker's downfall 10 days later. Krenz, who had responsibility for many internal security
functions before Honecker's ouster, criticized the use of force
during his testimony Wednesday. Krenz, who was thrown out six weeks after succeeding Honecker on
Oct. 18, insisted he knew nothing about any orders to shoot
demonstrators. Numerous news media accounts have said Honecker
either planned or issued such orders. Krenz said he accepted ``joint responsibility for misjudging
dissident citizens and dissident groups for years.'' ``Honecker had lost touch with reality and had unrealistic
perspectives,'' Krenz said of his one-time patron, who for years
treated him like a son. Honecker has been in ill health following gallbladder surgery
last summer. He was recently operated on for a malignant kidney
tumor. Krenz's current occupation has not been publicized, following
his fall as party chief on Dec. 3. BFN 

  [Text] Berlin -- Erich Honecker, the former GDR head of 
state, died at his house in Santiago, Chile on Sunday morning 
[29 May], according to his lawyer. However, everything that was 
sensible had been done with regard to his cancer. Becker could not comment on the exact cause of Honecker's 
death. Becker said he did not know whether Honecker has left a will 
or where the funeral would be held. He also said he cannot say whether Margot Honecker, who had 
informed Becker of her husband's death, will be allowed to stay 
in Chile. After being released from prison in 1993, Honecker 
had traveled to Santiago to join his daughter, who is married to 
a Chilean. Since then, he and his wife had been living in a 
house in a wealthy Santiago area. Former East German leader Erich
Honecker may be moved to a monastery to protect him from a possible
lynching by enraged citizens, a newspaper said Wednesday. In a front-page story, the mass-circulation Bild newspaper said
``Lynch Danger _ Church Wants to Grant Honecker Asylum.'' The Wandlitz homes, including the one in which Honecker still
lives, are being converted to a medical rehabilitation center for
children. Honecker is expected to be forced out of the compound in
February. In recent weeks, East German groups have called for punishing
Honecker and for moving him to smaller quarters ``with an outside
toilet,'' Bild said. The current leadership fears that in such a situation, Honecker
``might be attacked and become a victim of lynch justice,'' Bild
said. Honecker, 77, underwent gall-bladder surgery in August, and East
German media reported he remains seriously ill. East Germany authorities on Friday
interrogated former Communist leader Erich Honecker about his role
in the killings of people who tried to flee the country. The government announced in June that Honecker, Mielke and
several border guards would be investigated on possible murder
charges in connection with those deaths. Honecker, 77 and in failing health, and several other members of
his ousted regime already have been charged with corruption and
abuse of power. The murder charge could put Honecker behind bars for life, but
his poor health makes prosecution questionable. He is staying in a
Soviet hospital outside Berlin. Last month, a medical panel ruled that Honecker was too ill to
be jailed pending investigation but fit enough to be prosecuted. East Germany's democratic government has changed its mind
several times on whether to pursue charges against the aging
members of the former hard-line regime that was toppled in last
autumn's pro-democracy protests.
