Most San Francisco-area homeowners may
have to pay for damage from Tuesday's earthquake out of their own
pockets, while insurance companies may reap long-term benefits from
higher rates, industry spokesmen and analysts said Wednesday. Only 15 percent to 20 percent of California homeowners have
earthquake insurance, which typically requires a 10 percent
deductible and costs between $200 to $400 a year for a $100,000
home, according to industry spokesmen. The Association of California Insurance Cos. in Sacramento said
that in the San Francisco area roughly 25 to 30 percent of the
homes have earthquake insurance. The organization estimated
residential damages from Tuesday's earthquake at $500 million in
the Bay area, with between $100 million to $150 million insured. Insured homeowners without earthquake protection will get
reimbursed only if their homes were ravaged by fire, which is
covered under basic homeowner insurance polices, said Hugh Strawn,
director of catastrophe services at the Property Loss Research
Bureau in Schaumburg, Ill.
   Insurance companies attempted Wednesday to assess the amount of
quake-related damages they're likely to have to pay. In addition to
home damage, the companies likely will get claims for automobile
damage, broken glass, theft and burglary, business interruption due
to electrical outages, water damage and, possibly, workers
compensation. Some estimated that insurers might face bills totaling $1
billion or more from the quake. But industry observers said they
don't expect any company to suffer serious financial damage from
quake-related claims. ``We don't think any company is going to have problems paying
claims,'' said Elisa Siegal, public affairs manager for the
American Insurance Association, a Washington-based trade group. Industry analysts predicted
insurers would be able to reverse three years of declining rates
and win rate hikes from state regulators due to the quake damages
and the estimated $4 billion in damages from Hurricane Hugo, which
hammered South Carolina and other parts of the southeastern United
States earlier this month. An increase in insurance rates could translate into greater
profitability in the long term, the analysts said. ``There's a perception that this could turn the cycle ... that
this could be enough to firm pricing,'' said Gloria L. Vogel, an
analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc. in New York. Despite their predictions for the long run, the analysts warned
that fourth-quarter earnings among insurance companies are likely
to be disappointing. ``It's going to be a meaningful loss, perhaps as big as Hugo,''
said Robert Glasspiegel, an analyst with Hartford-based Langen
McAlenney. On the New York Stock Exchange, some insurance company stock
rose on Wednesday. Aetna Life & Casualty Co. rose $2.37{ to $59.50
a share; ITT Corp., parent of The Hartford, was up 37{ cents to
$59; and the Travelers Cos. Reinsurance companies, which absorb risk from policy writers,
did especially well. General Re Corp. rose $2.75 to $86.50 and
Marsh & McLennan Cos. In California, earthquake insurance is an emotional and
politically-charged issue. Roughly two-thirds of all insurance
policies written in the United States are sold in California, where
many of the nation's most damaging earthquakes have occurred..
   Under a 1985 California law, insurers are required to offer
earthquake insurance to homebuyers, but homebuyers are not required
to buy the coverage. Insurers aren't required to offer earthquake insurance to
commercial property owners, but the percentage of business property
with the coverage is very high, industry spokesmen said. They
estimated that at least 25 percent, and probably many more,
business properties are insured. Because of its high costs, earthquake insurance has become a
target of the controversial Proposition 103 approved by California
voters last year. The proposition calls for a 20 percent rollback
in insurance rates. Insurers and state regulators are battling over
the rates and how they're set. Gov. George Deukmejian is right to call the Legislature into special session 
within the next two weeks to deal with the effects of last Tuesday's Northern 
California earthquake. With Congress already moving to grant up to $3 billion 
in relief, earthquake victims need to know that state officials are prepared to 
come up with the state's share of disaster and reconstruction aid as soon as 
possible, and as soon as is practical. Deukmejian should be commended, as well, 
for advising state officials to do all they can to expedite aid to earthquake 
victims without getting too tangled up in red tape. The governor is wrong, however, in his campaign to distance himself from the 
California Department of Transportation on the issue of what caused the Nimitz 
Freeway in Oakland to collapse, and what could or should have been done to have 
prevented it. While Deukmejian is not necessarily blaming Caltrans, he seems to 
be preparing himself for such investigatory questions as: "What did you know 
and when did you know it?" The governor's answer, which he has been repeating ever since the day of the 
quake, was that no one in Caltrans ever told him a freeway might collapse in an 
earthquake. He was shocked that such a thing would happen. This has the 
earmarks of a preemptive defense against any allegation that California stinted 
on highway reinforcement because transportation funds have been short during 
his administration, possibly because he had opposed a gasoline tax increase. There is keen interest, of course, in why the freeway collapsed, and whether 
something might have been done. The major reason is so that California can 
learn from the experience as it designs new roads and reinforces existing ones 
against the next quake. There has been no widespread outcry against the 
governor. While the Department of Transportation and the state Transportation 
Commission do exercise considerable control over the allocation of highway 
funds, the governor also sets general state priorities. The governor complained on Sunday that the highway engineers never came to him 
and told him that bridges or freeways might collapse in an earthquake. But no 
one who has lived in California more than a few months would rule out the 
chance that any bridge or freeway could collapse in the right kind of 
earthquake. California is on the edge of earthquake-related technology, but 
still does not know everything that needs to be known. The state learns more 
from every earthquake and a critical need now is to learn everything possible 
from Tuesday, Oct. 17. But it is also the time to concentrate on helping quake victims through these 
most trying days of their experience -- the period when the emergency response 
is over and people face the dreary details of restoring their life to some kind 
of normality. In the Bay Area, that includes hundreds of thousands of commuters 
who did not suffer personal damage, but face massive obstacles in getting to 
work. The governor and legislative leaders will meet again next Monday to determine 
the timing and agenda of a special session. It almost certainly would include a 
temporary gasoline-tax increase to deal with highway reconstruction and repair 
and possible general revenues for other forms of disaster relief. Existing law 
already gives the governor considerable discretion in diverting reserve funds 
on hand to the Office of Emergency Services for allocation to local 
governments. But the need could well exceed the present reserve. The scope of 
the disaster would seem to justify a temporary surcharge. The governor and Legislature should not wait too long to start the session, 
although they do not yet have precise damage estimates or know just how much 
the federal government will send to California. The Legislature can begin 
organizing its staff and committees now so the appropriate legislation can be 
passed as soon as that information is obtained. The White House is making sure nobody will accuse it of taking this crisis lightly. In the aftermath of the California earthquake, President Bush and his aides flew into a whirlwind of earthquake-related activity yesterday morning. Some of it was necessary to get federal help flowing to victims, but some seemed designed mostly to project an image of a White House in action. Mr. Bush and his aides were accused of responding too slowly after the Exxon Valdez oil tanker split open in Alaskan waters and Hurricane Hugo struck the Carolina coast, and they clearly don't want a repeat of those charges now. So the White House announced that Mr. Bush got his first earthquake briefing of the day at 6:30 a.m. from chief of staff John Sununu. By noon, Mr. Bush had taken two phone calls from Vice President Dan Quayle, who was in California; made a televised statement of concern; signed a disaster proclamation; received a written report from the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and visited FEMA headquarters. Mr. Bush himself essentially acknowledged that he and his aides were trying to head off criticism. On his FEMA visit, Mr. Bush said that he hoped there would be "less carping" about the emergency office's performance this time, adding that the agency "took a hit" for its reaction to Hurricane Hugo. The White House already is talking of Mr. Bush visiting the California earthquake site this weekend. He visited the Hugo devastation but not until after local leaders urged him to do so. Insurers face the prospect of paying out billions of dollars for damages caused by this week's California earthquake. Getting a grip on the extent of the damages is proving a far more difficult task than what insurers faced after Hurricane Hugo ripped through the Caribbean and the Carolinas last month. The earthquake's toll, including possible deep structural damage, goes far beyond the more easily observed damage from a hurricane, says George Reider, a vice president in Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co.'s claims division. But investors are betting that the financial and psychological impact of the earthquake, coming so soon after the hurricane, will help stem more than two years of intense price-cutting wars among business insurers. Reflecting that logic, insurance-company stocks posted strong gains. Aetna and other insurers are hiring engineers and architects to help them assess structural damage. Most insurers already have mobilized their "catastrophe" teams to begin processing claims from their policyholders in northern California. Since commercial air travel is interrupted, Aetna, based in Hartford, Conn., chartered three planes to fly claims adjusters into Sacramento and then planned for them to drive to the Bay area. About 25 adjusters were dispatched yesterday afternoon, along with laptop computers, cellular phones and blank checks. Some adjusters, already in other parts of California, drove to the disaster area with recreational vehicles and mobile homes that could be used as makeshift claims-processing centers. Insurers will be advertising 800 numbers -- probably on the radio -- that policyholders can call to get assistance on how to submit claims. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., the largest home and auto insurer in California, believes the losses from the earthquake could be somewhat less than the $475 million in damages it expects to pay out for claims resulting from Hurricane Hugo. State Farm, based in Bloomington, Ind., is also the largest writer of personal-property earthquake insurance in California. Earthquake insurance is sold as a separate policy or a specific endorsement "rider" on a homeowner's policy in California, because of the area's vulnerability to earthquakes. State Farm said about 25% of its policyholders in California have also purchased earthquake insurance. Allstate Insurance Co., a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co., said about 23% of its personal property policyholders -- about 28% in the San Franciso area -- also have earthquake coverage. The Association of California Insurance Companies estimated damage to residential property could total $500 million, but only $100 million to $150 million is insured, it said. Officials from the American Insurance Association's property-claim service division, which coordinates the efforts of the claims adjusters in an area after a natural disaster, will be flying to San Francisco today. They expect to have a preliminary estimate of the damages in a day or two. Roads and bridges in the Bay area appear to have suffered some of the most costly damage. Highways, such as the section of Interstate 880 that collapsed in Oakland, generally don't have insurance coverage. Industry officials say the Bay Bridge -- unlike some bridges -- has no earthquake coverage, either, so the cost of repairing it probably would have to be paid out of state general operating funds. However, the bridge, which charges a $1 toll each way, does have "loss of income" insurance to replace lost revenue if the operation of the bridge is interrupted for more than seven days. That coverage is provided by a syndicate of insurance companies including Fireman's Fund Corp., based in Novato, Calif., and Cigna Corp., based in Philadelphia. Earthquake-related claims aren't expected to cause significant financial problems for the insurance industry as a whole. Instead, even with the liabilities of two natural disasters in recent weeks, analysts said the total capital of the industry is likely to be higher at year end than it was at midyear. Indeed, the earthquake could contribute to a turnaround in the insurance cycle in a couple of ways. For example, insurers may seek to limit their future exposure to catastrophes by increasing the amount of reinsurance they buy. Such increased demand for reinsurance, along with the losses the reinsurers will bear from these two disasters, are likely to spur increases in reinsurance prices that will later be translated into an overall price rise. Reinsurance is protection taken out by the insurance firms themselves. "We are saying this is the breaking point, this is the event that will change the psychology of the marketplace," said William Yankus, an analyst with Conning & Co., a Hartford firm that specializes in the insurance industry. His firm, along with some others, issued new buy recommendations on insurer stocks yesterday. Among the insurance stocks, big gainers included American International Group, up $3.25 to $102.625; General Re Corp., up $2.75 to $86.50; Aetna, up $2.375 to $59.50; and Marsh & McLennan Inc., up $3.125 to $75.875. Still, a few individual companies, most likely smaller ones, could be devastated. "I think there is a damned good chance someone is going to hit the skids on this," said Oppenheimer & Co. analyst Myron Picoult. He suspects some insurers who had purchased reinsurance to limit their exposure to catastrophes will discover that reinsurance was used up by Hurricane Hugo. British, West German, Scandinavian and other overseas insurers are bracing for big claims from the San Francisco earthquake disaster. Although it's unclear how much exposure the London market will face, U.K. underwriters traditionally have a large reinsurance exposure to U.S. catastrophe coverage. Jack Byrne, chairman of Fireman's Fund, said this disaster will test the catastrophe reinsurance market, causing these rates to soar. The catastrophe losses sustained by insurers this year will probably be the worst on an inflation-adjusted basis since 1906 -- when another earthquake sparked the Great San Francisco Fire. Orin Kramer, an insurance consultant in New York, estimates that the 1906 San Francisco destruction, on an inflation-adjusted basis, included insured losses of $5.8 billion. He is estimating this week's disaster will generate insured losses of $2 billion to $4 billion, following about $4 billion in costs to insurers from Hurricane Hugo. "I've been wandering around San Francisco and it's like the blind man trying to 
feel an elephant. We're just now figuring out bits and pieces of this 
disaster." -- Tom Tobin, of the California Seismic Safety Commission. "It was like somebody slugging a punching bag. Usually earthquakes pass, but 
this one went on and on. It just wouldn't stop...It was very, very bad." -- Schoolteacher Flora Churnin, who was at her Silicon Valley town of Sunnyvale 
when the earthquake struck. -- Cecile Candone, who was driving south toward San Francisco from the Sonoma 
wine country when she spotted the Marina district fire. "This upper deck was absolutely shaking, the light stanchions were blowing back 
and forth." -- Suzyn Waldman, a reporter covering the World Series at 
Candlestick Park for a New York radio station.
