The Association of California Insurance Cos. in Sacramento said
that in the San Francisco area roughly 25 to 30 percent of the
homes have earthquake insurance.
Insured homeowners without earthquake protection will get
reimbursed only if their homes were ravaged by fire, which is
covered under basic homeowner insurance polices, said Hugh Strawn,
director of catastrophe services at the Property Loss Research
Bureau in Schaumburg, Ill.
   Insurance companies attempted Wednesday to assess the amount of
quake-related damages they're likely to have to pay.
Insurers aren't required to offer earthquake insurance to
commercial property owners, but the percentage of business property
with the coverage is very high, industry spokesmen said.
The governor is wrong, however, in his campaign to distance himself from the 
California Department of Transportation on the issue of what caused the Nimitz 
Freeway in Oakland to collapse, and what could or should have been done to have 
prevented it.
The governor complained on Sunday that the highway engineers never came to him 
and told him that bridges or freeways might collapse in an earthquake.
California is on the edge of earthquake-related technology, but 
still does not know everything that needs to be known.
But it is also the time to concentrate on helping quake victims through these 
most trying days of their experience -- the period when the emergency response 
is over and people face the dreary details of restoring their life to some kind 
of normality.
In the Bay Area, that includes hundreds of thousands of commuters 
who did not suffer personal damage, but face massive obstacles in getting to 
work.
So the White House announced that Mr. Bush got his first earthquake briefing of the day at 6:30 a.m. from chief of staff John Sununu.
The earthquake's toll, including possible deep structural damage, goes far beyond the more easily observed damage from a hurricane, says George Reider, a vice president in Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co.'s claims division.
Some adjusters, already in other parts of California, drove to the disaster area with recreational vehicles and mobile homes that could be used as makeshift claims-processing centers.
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., the largest home and auto insurer in California, believes the losses from the earthquake could be somewhat less than the $475 million in damages it expects to pay out for claims resulting from Hurricane Hugo.
Earthquake insurance is sold as a separate policy or a specific endorsement "rider" on a homeowner's policy in California, because of the area's vulnerability to earthquakes.
Officials from the American Insurance Association's property-claim service division, which coordinates the efforts of the claims adjusters in an area after a natural disaster, will be flying to San Francisco today.
Roads and bridges in the Bay area appear to have suffered some of the most costly damage.
Indeed, the earthquake could contribute to a turnaround in the insurance cycle in a couple of ways.
Such increased demand for reinsurance, along with the losses the reinsurers will bear from these two disasters, are likely to spur increases in reinsurance prices that will later be translated into an overall price rise.
