An explosion today flattened a military
barracks and tore through nearby homes, killing 11 people and
injuring 22, police said. The IRA claimed responsibility for the
blast. Stunned neighbors gathered outside homes that
were damaged or destroyed. He said many of the injured were seriously hurt. ``There was a terrific crash which reminded me of the Blitz. Defense Secretary Tom King, inspecting the wreckage, said: ``It
is not yet absolutely confirmed that it is a bomb, but all the
evidence is quite clearly that this is an IRA atrocity.'' British military installations are a frequent bombing target of
the Irish Republican Army in its campaign to rid Northern Ireland of
British rule, but today's explosion in the coastal town 70 miles
southeast of London was the worst IRA attack on the British mainland
in more than seven years. The explosion occurred at at 8:26 a.m. in a lounge in the
barracks. Dozens of homes near the school were damaged, including four that
were destroyed. Witnesses reported hearing the explosion two miles
away. The Defense Ministry would not say how many servicemen and
civilians were included in the casualty figures. Firefighters used heavy lifting equipment and thermal cameras to
search through the debris, said Kent Fire Brigade spokesman Kevin
Simmons. Irish Prime Minister Charles Haughey issued a statement in Dublin
condemning the attack, calling it an ``outrage.'' The last IRA bomb attempt on the British mainland was in February
when about 60 soldiers were evacuated from their barracks in
Shropshire, western England, just before a bomb exploded. One
soldier was killed and nine wounded in an IRA bomb attack on an army
barracks in north London in August 1988. In July 1982, eight soldiers died in IRA bombings near the
Household Cavalry barracks in central London and at a bandstand in
the capital's Regent's Park where an army band was playing. Three
people died later and a total of 51 were injured in the bombings. The music school is the training center for young recruits who
want to play in the seven Royal Marines bands. Up to 250 young men,
most between 16 and 20, are based at the school, where they receive
military and musical training. ``The house has been blown to bits,'' she said. She was holding her 4-month-old son Luke in her arms
with her other boys, Ben, 3, and Joshua, 2, at her side. ``I looked up from the sink and I just saw the whole building
explode,'' she said. ``I told the boys to run and as Joshua turned a
slither of glass embedded itself in his back. The whole window was
blown across the kitchen. The bang was so loud I thought the whole house was coming in.'' As workers tried to patch holes in his roof, he said: ``The
bedroom ceiling fell in on me. I woke to find huge slabs of plaster
on the bed and floor. As soon as I got up I
looked out of what was left of the window and knew it was the
barracks.'' Neighbors were breakfasting, heading to work
or asleep in bed when an explosion at a military barracks turned
their homes to rubble and they were confronted with the sight of
bodies being carried away. After that, the ceiling started to fall down around me,'' said Joan
Betteridge, a pensioner in the southern England town of Deal, where
the blast at the Royal Marines School of Music occurred. The Irish Republican Army claimed reponsibilty for the explosion,
which police said killed 11 people and injured 22. Nearby resident Sean Minnock said: ``I was asleep but woke up
with a hell of a jolt ... the bedroom ceiling fell in on me. It was horrible to watch and listen to,'' said Minnock,
28. I knew they were dead when they put them on the
floor and put bed blankets right over them.'' Minnock's wife, Janet, said the roof of their house was torn off
and all the back windows were shattered. Her next-door neighbor, Heather Hackett, 26, was standing at her
kitchen window facing the barracks, holding her 4-month-old son Luke
in her arms. Her other boys, Ben, 3, and Joshua, 2, were at her side. ``I told the boys to run and as Joshua turned a
sliver of glass embedded itself in his back. ``The whole window was blown across the kitchen. The bang was so loud I thought the whole
house was coming in. ``At first I thought for sure Joshua had been seriously injured. There was blood coming out of his back.'' Doctors removed the glass
and sent him home. College student Simon Mitford, 17, narrowly escaped being injured
in the explosion because he got up earlier than usual. ``His room was completely wrecked by the blast,'' his brother
Alex said. Of the barracks, he said: ``I heard music playing and then it
went bang and there was glass everywhere. It was a two-story
building but now 90 percent of it is rubble. ``I heard a marine scream out, `The band is under there.' Nine marine musicians and one civilian died in the blast, which also damaged 
dozens of nearby homes and could be heard two miles away. The musicians were 
between the ages of 16 and 20 as are most of the recruits in the school. A police spokesman said forensic experts are still trying to determine with 
certainty that the explosion was the result of a bomb. Security sources said they believe that at least two IRA "active service" 
units, each composed of four or five members, are operating in Britain and 
continental Europe. One member, known as the "Jackal" after the assassin in the Frederick Forsyth 
novel "The Day of the Jackal," has been eluding the authorities for two years. Friday's explosion occurred about 8:30 a.m. in a lounge at the Royal Marines 
School of Music near Deal, on the English Channel in the county of Kent. At the 
school are about 250 recruits who receive military and musical training before 
joining Royal Marines bands. The roof of the three-story barracks collapsed, trapping victims beneath the 
rubble. Firefighters used thermal cameras and dogs to search the debris for 
victims and survivors. Heavy lifting gear was brought to the scene from a 
nearby site where a tunnel is being built beneath the English Channel. "I looked up from the sink and I just saw the whole building explode," Heather 
Hackett, a 26-year-old Deal housewife, told the British Press Assn. She said 
she told her children to run for cover, but as they did, her kitchen window 
shattered. Her 
2-year-old son, Joshua, was hit by a shard that embedded itself in his back but 
caused no serious injury. "I just screamed and ran out of the room," she said. " The bang was so loud I 
thought the whole house was coming in." "The real evil of these murders is that the people who commit them, the 
'godfathers' who send them to commit them, know that they will actually achieve 
nothing. We shall find the people responsible 
for this outrage sooner or later, as we have already found some of those 
responsible for the earlier outrages, and they will be brought to justice." The republican underground organization opposes British rule 
in the predominantly Protestant province and is fighting to join the mainly 
Roman Catholic south in a united, independent Ireland. The locally recruited, overwhelmingly Protestant Ulster Defense Regiment has 
come under fire in connection with an investigation into the leak of secret 
government lists of suspected IRA members to Protestant assassination squads. It is widely hated by the Catholic minority in the province, and the Irish 
government in Dublin has urged Britain to disband the force. Now in 
turn we have visited the Royal Marines in Kent. But we still want peace, and we 
want the British government to leave our country." The statement was signed "P. O'Neill, Irish Republican Publicity Bureau," a 
signature that has appeared on earlier IRA bombing claims. Friday's attack was the worst on the mainland since the virtually simultaneous 
bombings of July, 1982, directed at ceremonial military units in London's Hyde 
Park and Regent's Park. Eight persons were killed by IRA car bombs outside Harrods department store 
here in December, 1983, and 21 were killed and 162 injured in two Birmingham 
public house bombings in the fall of 1974. An attempted barracks bombing was averted last February when a sentry came upon 
two intruders who had managed to get inside a military camp in Shropshire. There has been a series of bomb and automatic rifle attacks this year on 
British soldiers and their families stationed in West Germany. Earlier this 
month an IRA gunman shot to death an army wife, Heidi Hazell, 25, in her car 
near her home at Dortmund. Jean Cleatheroe, whose son Andrew was killed, joined local
residents and opposition politicians in denouncing the use of
private security firms to protect the music school and 29 other
military establishments in Britain. ``The security at those barracks was absolutely abysmal. We have always said how easy it would be for
anyone to get in ... What could ordinary security men do to stop
terrorists?'' British military installations are a frequent target of the IRA's
campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland and unite the
predominantly Protestant province with the mainly Roman Catholic
Republic of Ireland. Friday's attack was the worst since July 1982, when 11 servicemen
were fatally wounded in bombings in central London. Shocked residents of Deal gathered outside the barracks to lay
flowers in tribute to the young men they called the ``Bandies.'' An 11-year-old Royal Marines cadet in full dress uniform marched
to the barracks and smartly saluted the Royal Marines sign. ``I'm proud of my uniform and I'm proud of all the Marines I
knew. I hate the people who did this to them,'' said Scott Roberts. Runcie said one of the men's main concerns was that their hands
would heal properly so they could continue playing their musical
instruments. Police investigating the attack were searching a nearby house
that had been rented briefly by three men with Irish accents. ``We know when the men arrived and when they left,'' Cmdr. He said the house, which overlooks the barracks recreation center
destroyed by the Friday morning blast, was rented by its English
owners to three men for two to three weeks. There was no proof the house was an IRA hideout, the commander
said. Police said all 10 men killed during a coffee break between
morning band practices were servicemen. Of 22 men injured, 12
remained hospitalized Saturday, five in serious condition. The Irish Republican Army on Friday claimed responsibility for
the explosion, which also severely damaged several nearby houses. Police have not determined what caused the blast, but
Churchill-Coleman said, ``It would seem to be some form of
improvised device using high explosives.'' The IRA did not specify
how it caused the blast. Clergyman urged relatives and friends of dead and maimed
musicians to forgive the bombers. The prince, husband of Queen Elizabeth II and captain general of
the Royal Marines, visited injured men in the hospital and toured
the severely damaged Royal Marines School of Music in Deal,
southeast Britain. ``It will not help the IRA win anything,'' said Philip, who wore
a Royal Marines tie. One simply wonders what
sort of mentality can even contemplate such meaningless acts. He paid tribute to the 12 injured men, five of whom were
critically wounded. The prince was accompanied by Viscountess Mountbatten, daughter
of Lord Mountbatten, who was killed by an IRA bomb on his boat in
1979. Defense Secretary Tom King said Sunday he has issued an alert to
all military installations to prevent other attacks. ``The perpetrators of the latest outrage are at large and there
is a risk of other attacks,'' King said. King defended the use of private security firms hired to guard
the Deal school and 29 other ``low-risk'' military installations in
Britain. Local residents and grieving relatives have said security
was lax and should be turned back to the marines. ``Private security guards can be a very useful additional
assistance. They also help to reduce the amount of time soldiers
have to spend on what is not the most enjoyable part of their
activity.'' The Rev. Charles Howard, a Royal Navy chaplain, asked the
300-member congregation inside the barracks, ``if you can find room
in your hearts ... pray for the men who perpetrated this terrible
act, that God will soften their hearts and turn them from their
violent and evil ways.'' It was the
worst IRA attack on the British mainland since July 1982. ``But ... forgive them, they not what they do.'' ``The young men whom we lost were murdered by common murderers
who must be found and brought to justice and put behind bars for a
very long time,'' she said following a tour of the school's wrecked
barracks in Deal, southeast England. ``We lost 10 remarkable musicians, not fighting men, just
because some people try to bomb others out of their democratic
views,'' she said. Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the legal political arm of
the IRA, issued a statement disputing Mrs. Thatcher's remarks,
saying ``she knows in her heart of hearts the real nature of the
conflict, its cause and the remedy.'' The IRA is fighting to end British rule in Northern Ireland and
unite the predominantly Protestant province with the Roman Catholic
Republic of Ireland. ``We want an end to all violent deaths arising out of the
present relationship between our two countries,'' Adams said. ``We
want a new peaceful relationship based on an acceptance and respect
for our rights as a sovereign nation.'' Raymond Kendall, the secretary-general of the international
police organization Interpol, pledged the organization's full
support in the hunt for those who blew up the school. ``I hope we will have a part to play in finding them,'' said
Kendall after opening the International Police Exhibition and
Conference in London. ``They are criminals of the worst sort and should be dealt with
as such.'' Before landing in Deal, Mrs. Thatcher's helicopter flew over the
rubble that had been the band's recreation center. The IRA bombing that killed 10 men and blew
apart a building at the Royal Marines Music School outraged Britons
and stirred recriminations over safety standards at the school. A huge explosion in a barracks staff room Friday morning leveled
the three-story building as bandsmen took a coffee break between
practice sessions on the school's parade ground. Twelve of the 22 people injured were hospitalized, eight of them
in serious condition, police said. They said nine of the dead were
bandsmen and one other man was not immediately identified. Dozens of neighboring homes in the quiet southeastern English
seaside town of Deal were damaged. Although trainees at the school range in age from 16 to 20, Col. John Ware, principal director of music, said the slain bandsmen all
were trained, adult musicians. They held military ranks but none had
been trained as a fighting soldier. The outlawed Irish Republican Army, engaged in a 20-year-old
campaign to drive the British from the province of Northern Ireland,
claimed responsibility in a telephone call to Ireland International,
a Dublin news agency. Residents of the area adjoining the Marines school said Friday
that despite government calls for stepped-up public alertness
against terrorists, security at the school had eased noticeably. ``Anyone in Deal will tell you how easy it is to get into the
base,'' said Fred Verge, a 70-year-old army veteran. Local people laid wreaths and bouquets of flowers at the entrance
to the barracks. The Royal Marines Music School is one of 30 military
establishments in Britain that use private security firms, Defense
Ministry figures show. The cowardly nature of their
attacks is such that every military establishment is under threat.'' He said private security firms were assigned to areas considered
low risks for attacks. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher received news of the bombing
while aboard a jet over Siberia en route from Japan to Moscow. She
called it a ``deeply serious outrage.'' King visited the scene soon after the explosion. It was an apparent reference to her speech praising the locally
recruited Ulster Defense Regiment as ``a very, very brave group of
men'' who have lost 179 members in IRA attacks since 1970. The mainly Protestant UDR is regarded by many Catholics as a
sectarian force, and is at present under a cloud over allegations
that some recruits leaked names, addresses and photos of IRA
suspects to Protestant assassins. British military installations are a frequent target of the IRA
campaign. The music school trains young recruits for the seven Royal
Marines bands. Up to 250 young men, most ages 16 to 20, undergo
military and musical training there, working with older,
professional bandsmen. Thirty people
were injured and up to 18 were missing and feared trapped in the
rubble. ``The building has collapsed,'' said a ministry spokesman,
speaking anonymously in keeping with British custom. ``We've no idea of the cause of the blast at the moment. Kent police said 17 or 18 people were trapped. The Defense
Ministry said seven were missing. Ten doctors gave emergency treatment at the scene and 11
ambulances took the injured to two hospitals, the ambulance service
said. Gas supplies to the barracks were cut as a precautionary
measure, a spokesman said.
