``I told the boys to run and as Joshua turned a
slither of glass embedded itself in his back.
Neighbors were breakfasting, heading to work
or asleep in bed when an explosion at a military barracks turned
their homes to rubble and they were confronted with the sight of
bodies being carried away.
Local residents and grieving relatives have said security
was lax and should be turned back to the marines.
Of the barracks, he said: ``I heard music playing and then it
went bang and there was glass everywhere.
Local people laid wreaths and bouquets of flowers at the entrance
to the barracks.
King defended the use of private security firms hired to guard
the Deal school and 29 other ``low-risk'' military installations in
Britain.
It was an apparent reference to her speech praising the locally
recruited Ulster Defense Regiment as ``a very, very brave group of
men'' who have lost 179 members in IRA attacks since 1970.
Although trainees at the school range in age from 16 to 20, Col. John Ware, principal director of music, said the slain bandsmen all
were trained, adult musicians.
Nearby resident Sean Minnock said: ``I was asleep but woke up
with a hell of a jolt ... the bedroom ceiling fell in on me.
Minnock's wife, Janet, said the roof of their house was torn off
and all the back windows were shattered.
``I hope we will have a part to play in finding them,'' said
Kendall after opening the International Police Exhibition and
Conference in London.
British military installations are a frequent target of the IRA's
campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland and unite the
predominantly Protestant province with the mainly Roman Catholic
Republic of Ireland.
``The perpetrators of the latest outrage are at large and there
is a risk of other attacks,'' King said.
They said nine of the dead were
bandsmen and one other man was not immediately identified.
A police spokesman said forensic experts are still trying to determine with 
certainty that the explosion was the result of a bomb.
We shall find the people responsible 
for this outrage sooner or later, as we have already found some of those 
responsible for the earlier outrages, and they will be brought to justice."
I woke to find huge slabs of plaster
on the bed and floor.
``The young men whom we lost were murdered by common murderers
who must be found and brought to justice and put behind bars for a
very long time,'' she said following a tour of the school's wrecked
barracks in Deal, southeast England.
