But they
didn't find any solid evidence that music, art and dance improve
reading, or that classes in the arts improve test scores.
``When the arts become integrated into the curriculum they are
an important part of whole school improvement that shouldn't be
ignored,'' Aprill said.
The school has a new series of courses on hydropower,
electronics, architecture, building materials, electric
appliances, tourism, computers, accounting, law, public relations,
and practical English to meet the local economic and industrial
development needs.
Areas of research will include new digital
techniques for music, dance, storytelling and the visual arts.
``One of the
things that ArtsConnectEd begins to do is tie the object into a
variety of life experiences.
NEW YORK _ After a long morning of drills in reading,
third-graders at Public School 156 in Brownsville, Brooklyn, spent
an hour last Friday dancing to the urgent flutter of flamenco
music.
Carnegie Hall spends close to $1 million a year training
teachers to use music in the classroom, putting on concerts for
school children and sending musicians to 22 schools across the city
for seven visits per class over a school year.
This week, educators from 40 countries are discussing how to
speed the progress at the International Conference on the Future of
Arts Education, sponsored by the New York International Festival of
the Arts, at IBM's conference site in Palisades, N.Y.

   ``We still need to teach the basic skills, but students today
need an education that recognizes a much wider range of
intellectual abilities and ways of communicating,'' said Ken
Robinson, co-chairman of the conference and a professor of arts
education at the University of Warwick in England.
``It takes so much extra work to start something like this,''
said Verano LaRue, the arts education specialist at Lotus Music and
Dance Studios, which Public School 156 is paying about $40,000 this
year to incorporate dance into the school's curriculum.
But Terry L. Baker, an education
consultant who is trying to measure the effectiveness of the
Annenberg programs, said educators still are not sure how to assess
a student's grasp of such ``abstract, emotional and spiritual''
subjects as music and painting.
