``Kids participation  
in the arts declines. The excitement of the instrument is also drawing non-Caribbean,
particularly black American, youngsters looking for a different
music than the blues, jazz or hip-hop that dominate their musical
environment. That often has forced students to choose which 
standards to satisfy or has made them take extra courses to meet 
both. So did Rauscher, who cautioned against distorting her
team's modest findings. Surgeons,
engineers and archaeologists need spatial skills. Does
music per se improve mental gymnastics? ``I don't need proof,'' said Lisha Papert
Lercari, director of the Music and the Brain Project of the 42nd
Street Development Fund in Manhattan, which has developed a
keyboard program that is now being taught in 23 schools ``The kids
are discovering form and patterns, and noticing things we never
saw.'' But they
didn't find any solid evidence that music, art and dance improve
reading, or that classes in the arts improve test scores. ``When the arts become integrated into the curriculum they are
an important part of whole school improvement that shouldn't be
ignored,'' Aprill said. Governor, in your heart, that fact must strike you as shameful,
especially in a state whose legislators are contorting themselves
trying to find ways to ``give back'' a great budget surplus. Some say they might drop
out if not for the arts programs. About 55 students attend the academy, which was modeled after
the nationally recognized George Caleb Bingham Fine Arts Academy in
the Independence district. Students can get one-half
credit for high school and three hours of credit through Blue River
Community College. ``They
don't have to follow a structured classroom curriculum.'' The school has a new series of courses on hydropower,
electronics, architecture, building materials, electric
appliances, tourism, computers, accounting, law, public relations,
and practical English to meet the local economic and industrial
development needs. In ``The Myth
of the First Three Years,'' which will be published Sept. 9 by Free
Press (hardcover, $25), Bruer makes a case that too much emphasis
has been placed on brain development in the first three years of
life. Inner City
Arts, only nine years ago a modest alternative, does. ``A lot of times, all they see is the glamour side of the
business, but they don't see all the work,'' said Charles Driebe,
an Atlanta entertainment lawyer. ``I've never sung in public before,'' Bryan said after the
session. Carnegie Hall tried to improve on this with help from Columbia
University's Teachers College and Educational Testing Services. Nonetheless, society pays a price for this progress. Areas of research will include new digital
techniques for music, dance, storytelling and the visual arts. ``One of the
things that ArtsConnectEd begins to do is tie the object into a
variety of life experiences. This is not a sideline enterprise; it is based on Cuba
alone. But the
basic impulses of Cuban music are there to be heard. Liszt and Strauss
played by a major orchestra made a nice change, but the next
important music of this world may arrive not by way of New York or
Vienna concert halls but from the streets of Latin America.(BOX)
 
	PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) -- Oregon, with the nation's fastest-growing  
economy and highest SAT scores, is hardly a place where you would 
expect a school funding crisis. ``Economically this country is at the peak of its game,'' Susi  
said. I think parents have 
reached their limit.'' The 21 artists, arts administrators and community activists who
made up the the task force were chosen by Schell and City Council
member Nick Licata nine months ago. Although Schell's proposals fall short financially of the task
force's recommendations, task force members contacted Monday were
pleased by the mayor's annoucements. ``They give us a map of what he's thinking,'' she said. Some of his ideas are quite bold,
like the increasing the One Percent for Arts.'' The design is also an object lesson in construction. NEW YORK _ After a long morning of drills in reading,
third-graders at Public School 156 in Brownsville, Brooklyn, spent
an hour last Friday dancing to the urgent flutter of flamenco
music. Carnegie Hall spends close to $1 million a year training
teachers to use music in the classroom, putting on concerts for
school children and sending musicians to 22 schools across the city
for seven visits per class over a school year. Some institutions
report tensions with teachers who say the programs occupy too much
time. This week, educators from 40 countries are discussing how to
speed the progress at the International Conference on the Future of
Arts Education, sponsored by the New York International Festival of
the Arts, at IBM's conference site in Palisades, N.Y.

   ``We still need to teach the basic skills, but students today
need an education that recognizes a much wider range of
intellectual abilities and ways of communicating,'' said Ken
Robinson, co-chairman of the conference and a professor of arts
education at the University of Warwick in England. ``It takes so much extra work to start something like this,''
said Verano LaRue, the arts education specialist at Lotus Music and
Dance Studios, which Public School 156 is paying about $40,000 this
year to incorporate dance into the school's curriculum. she told a
boy who had put down his pencil after writing one line. But Terry L. Baker, an education
consultant who is trying to measure the effectiveness of the
Annenberg programs, said educators still are not sure how to assess
a student's grasp of such ``abstract, emotional and spiritual''
subjects as music and painting.
