And Quayle knows his future is in sticking to that.
Quayle's Senate biography, which his campaign is using as his
official background, says he was chief investigator of the unit in
the Attorney General's office from 1970 to 1971.
Quayle conceded Friday that the resume entry was ``inaccurate''
and said his staff had written the document.
He was
hired in an entry-level job and was promoted to a whole bunch of
jobs on his merits.
Patricia Gifford, a Marion Superior Court judge who was then an
assistant attorney general, said Friday that prior to the
establishment of the Consumer Protection Division, ``all complaints
and inquiries were handled by me.
In that same election, which he won, Quayle said he was ``on
active duty for several periods during his tenure'' in the Guard.
The statement referred to periods when Quayle was in basic training
and 15 days of camp each summer.
Gen. Wendell C. Phillippi _ who worked for Quayle's
grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam, as managing editor of The
Indianapolis News _ said he contacted the National Guard on behalf
of Quayle when the young man applied in 1969 and ``recommended him
very highly,'' the News reported.
A Bush aide said the matter was
discussed with the Indiana senator during the process that led to
his selection for the Bush ticket, and Quayle had denied that he
used influence to gain admittance to the Guard.
... That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael Dukakis,
and he is running for president,'' Dole said.
To those who say Quayle does not merit his own
exhibition, Quayle devotees say with a mixture of defiance and dignity that he
is, after all, the vice president of the United States.
"He's not
the fool that the talk show hosts think he is," says Dottie Watson, president
of the Republican Women of Huntington County. "
What a
role model for our children, to know that you can be a normal person, come
from a normal family and become vice president of the United States."
Dan and Marilyn Quayle met as law students in Indianapolis,
married while they were still in school and remain close to many of
their friends from that period.
He's already spent 12
years as a congressman and a senator, tackling the vital national
and international issues that affect the lives of all Americans and
the future of our country.
That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael
Dukakis _ and he is running for president.
The actor, who once
played the role of a presidential office seeker in ``The
Candidate'' sent Quayle a telegram telling him to stop the
look-alike references in his congressional campaign literature.
``Let's not start this business of who's wealthy,'' Sen. Alfonse
D'Amato, R-N.Y.
 
   Dan Quayle is likely to be a ``man on the
outside'' in George Bush's White House following a vice presidential
candidacy that began in a furor but settled into obscurity, experts
say.
The choice of Nixon was viewed as a move by Dwight
Eisenhower to appease the party's right wing, and Agnew was seen as
a political nonentity.
