One year after his election, Dan Quayle has achieved all he ever wanted: He has 
become dull. His coming-out party last Sunday was a true test of his new ability to not make 
news. And he didn't do so because back then he was making too much news. His every 
slip, his every gaffe, his every goof was news. So when Quayle got to Washington, he got there with one goal: Support the 
President and make himself a very small target. And it says something about Dan Quayle's reputation that he would be considered 
"above and beyond" the usual guest. That's because vice presidents don't actually do anything. They don't run 
departments or make policy. They mostly wait for heads of state to expire. As 
George Bush once joked about his duties as vice president: "You die; I fly." But Quayle was considered a hot TV guest because he might screw up. He might 
make a mistake or say something outrageous or disagree with the President. Quayle answered all the 
questions put to him and he made little if any news. Some major newspapers 
didn't even bother to do a story the next day. "Well, he wanted to concentrate on the more important part of the job," 
Beckwith said. " George Bush and 
Mikhail Gorbachev had announced a summit. And, oh yeah, Bush had said Dan Quayle would be on the ticket in 1992. Many thought it was a terrible choice, but there is nothing like a victory to 
give everything a rosy glow. I made a decision and it was the right decision and just to show you how right 
it was, I am making it again." I asked Beckwith if Quayle had been pleased by how the show had gone. A lot of the time, you never know what you're going to get into. Sometimes the questions can be not particularly serious." But Quayle got no questions like that last week. After the show, Fitzwater called Quayle to express his, and presumably the 
President's, pleasure at how Quayle had handled himself. And Quayle knows his future is in sticking to that. During the 1988 campaign, I 
interviewed Quayle and I came away with one overwhelming impression: Dan Quayle 
would run for President in 1996. And he will do so, I believe, by being a vice president who keeps his head 
down, his nose clean and his life dull. The law creating the unit passed April 14, 1971, and took effect
July 1. Quayle's Senate biography, which his campaign is using as his
official background, says he was chief investigator of the unit in
the Attorney General's office from 1970 to 1971. But) it would not have been before 1971,'' Smith said
Friday in a telephone interview. Quayle conceded Friday that the resume entry was ``inaccurate''
and said his staff had written the document. ``If it indicated that, that is inaccurate. I didn't hold that
job for two years,'' Quayle told reporters aboard his campaign
plane. Quayle, a 1969 graduate of DePauw University, was attending
Indiana University Law School at the time. M. Stanton Evans, then an editor with the Indianapolis News,
helped arrange his job interview with the state. He was
hired in an entry-level job and was promoted to a whole bunch of
jobs on his merits. Patricia Gifford, a Marion Superior Court judge who was then an
assistant attorney general, said Friday that prior to the
establishment of the Consumer Protection Division, ``all complaints
and inquiries were handled by me. Her
statement was released by the Quayle campaign. The Consumer Protection Division was created by the state
legislature to resolve complaints over defective products, false
claims in ads, faulty speedometer readings and mail-order fraud. In that same election, which he won, Quayle said he was ``on
active duty for several periods during his tenure'' in the Guard. The statement referred to periods when Quayle was in basic training
and 15 days of camp each summer. Quayle exhorted, as the crowd
erupted in cheers. Gen. Wendell C. Phillippi _ who worked for Quayle's
grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam, as managing editor of The
Indianapolis News _ said he contacted the National Guard on behalf
of Quayle when the young man applied in 1969 and ``recommended him
very highly,'' the News reported. A Bush aide said the matter was
discussed with the Indiana senator during the process that led to
his selection for the Bush ticket, and Quayle had denied that he
used influence to gain admittance to the Guard. Those who addressed the convention on his behalf also pulled out
their ammunition. ``He's already spent 12 years as a congressman and senator. ... That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael Dukakis,
and he is running for president,'' Dole said. Whether Quayle can overcome his difficult start on the national
ticket remains to be seen. Others, notably Democratic vice
presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro in 1984, found they could
not. To those who say Quayle does not merit his own
exhibition, Quayle devotees say with a mixture of defiance and dignity that he
is, after all, the vice president of the United States.; And a former housekeeper turned in a 20-year-old piece of carpeting she
saved from one of Quayle's floors.; "He has
taken such a bad rap," said Schenkel, a foundation board member. " If people
knew him, they'd see he's a regular person. These are the faithful, who have long since stopped expecting "good press"
on their man. But they are careful not to
stretch the superlatives. "He's not
the fool that the talk show hosts think he is," says Dottie Watson, president
of the Republican Women of Huntington County. " He's a very nice person, a
capable person. That is not to say
some people don't have some friendly advice for Quayle. " But in all due respect, we sure
hope nothing happens to President Bush."; Quayle has declined an invitation
to attend the tribute, citing a busy schedule. The free exhibition has turned a gray room
in the town's public library into a virtual Dan Quayle museum. The display
patches together pieces of a life that until the last decade was strikingly
ordinary.; It is all very 50s, very Middle American, almost
surreal in its innocence.; Sometimes he acts as if he has been disturbed;    But at other times he is as
cheerful as a bird.; Ultimately, the foundation wants to build
a repository for the memorabilia. What a
role model for our children, to know that you can be a normal person, come
from a normal family and become vice president of the United States." Dan Quayle's sister believes the Indiana
senator won't let his candidacy for vice president hurt the family
life he and his wife, Marilyn, enjoy. ``I don't think it will be tough on the family,'' said Martha
Saddler, Quayle's sister, who lives in Huntington, Ind. ``Since
he's been in politics, we all kind of shake our heads at his hectic
schedule and wonder how he does it. The Quayle family and friends were celebrating Tuesday afternoon
after George Bush announced he wants the 41-year-old Indiana
senator to be the Republican nominee for vice president. Dan and Marilyn Quayle met as law students in Indianapolis,
married while they were still in school and remain close to many of
their friends from that period. ``I think his strength is he'll remember who his friends are
even after this,'' said Evans, who was chairman of Quayle's 1986
campaign. When they campaign in Indiana, the Quayles often tour in two
groups _ the boys riding in parades with Marilyn Quayle and Corinne
and her father visiting county fairs. Tucker was fascinated by the idea, Quayle said. Mr. Chairman, four of my congressional colleagues and I are here
for the purpose of nominating the next vice president of the United
States. And almost every one of these letters asks for help with some
problem. I knew Corinne Quayle was from a political family because she
invited me to come along, too. Dan Quayle is a dedicated public servant and a devoted family
man. Whether it was the budget or defense, tax reform or the INF
treaty, Dan Quayle was there, a forceful advocate, and a staunch
supporter of the Reagan revolution. Now, I don't mean to suggest their presidential candidate lacks
experience. He's already spent 12
years as a congressman and a senator, tackling the vital national
and international issues that affect the lives of all Americans and
the future of our country. That is 12 more years of national experience than Michael
Dukakis _ and he is running for president. Former president Gerald Ford made the comparison with Kennedy, a
Democrat. What Quayle thinks of those references isn't known. But he
doesn't like it when people say he looks like movie idol Robert
Redford. In the parlance of politics, it's an issue. The so-called resemblance became a point of contention in the
1980 Senate race and Redford took umbrage. The actor, who once
played the role of a presidential office seeker in ``The
Candidate'' sent Quayle a telegram telling him to stop the
look-alike references in his congressional campaign literature. He wasn't asked how he felt about being
painted as another Jefferson or Kennedy. He is a Republican
vice presidential candidate who is not, as Spiro Agnew once said of
himself, a household word. To help him get known, eight fellow senators Wednesday took
turns telling reporters how much they liked him. ``Let's not start this business of who's wealthy,'' Sen. Alfonse
D'Amato, R-N.Y.
 
   Dan Quayle is likely to be a ``man on the
outside'' in George Bush's White House following a vice presidential
candidacy that began in a furor but settled into obscurity, experts
say. One thing that political scientists have been
talking about is just how much the vice presidency has grown. ... He doesn't have his own big reputation on Capitol
Hill. ... Dan Quayle has no friends in a Bush White House except
George Bush,'' Barilleaux says. Both of them will want to prove how
right the decision was,'' Mahe says. Even some
members of Quayle's own party were dismayed at Bush's choice. ``That's going to give him a good deal to overcome. The choice of Nixon was viewed as a move by Dwight
Eisenhower to appease the party's right wing, and Agnew was seen as
a political nonentity. ``We have arrived as being a traditional vice presidential
nominee because we are either on the back pages or either not on the
pages at all. ``Dan Quayle owes his political life to one man and one man
alone,'' Mahe says.
