Leonard Bernstein, the Renaissance man of music who excelled as pianist, 
composer, conductor and teacher and was, as well, the flamboyant ringmaster of 
his own nonstop circus, died Sunday in his Manhattan apartment.
Bernstein was the first American-born conductor to lead a major symphony 
orchestra, often joining his New York Philharmonic in playing his own pieces, 
while conducting from the piano.
He 
knew what he was doing, and the musicians he accompanied, wrote for, conducted, 
or lectured to and taught admired him as one of their own.
His 
father, Samuel Joseph Bernstein, was an entrepreneur of women's hair care 
products and a Talmudic scholar.
By age 12, he was studying at the New England Conservatory of Music and had 
determined, despite his father's objections, that music -- at that point 
playing the piano -- would be his career.
I have gone 
through all the conductors I know of in my mind and I finally asked God whom I 
shall take and God said, 'Take Bernstein,' " he said, granting the position as 
a favor not to God but to Koussevitzky.
Remarkable as his appointment was considering that he was an American and so 
young, Bernstein was given little chance of actually taking the podium.
Jennie Tourel had sung Bernstein's "I Hate Music" at her Town Hall debut the 
previous night, in itself an event big enough to bring his parents to town, and 
he had played for her and the post-recital party.
Bernstein was not to get his own orchestra until he took over the New York 
Philharmonic in 1957-58.
Successful as a pianist, composer and conductor, Bernstein, according to Joan 
Peyser in a controversial biography, consulted psychiatrists because of his 
internal conflict over the three pursuits.
TOM TUGEND 


Sherman Oaks 

 
   Leonard Bernstein, whose wide-ranging talents
and flamboyant personality helped make him the first American
maestro to conquer music's international podium, was buried today
alongside his wife.
Michael Wager, a very close friend of 
Bernstein's who was with him at the end, spoke movingly of how difficult it was 
for Bernstein to continue when illness had robbed him of his creative energy.
BMG also plans, according to spokesman Carl Pritzkat, the spring release of an 
early Bernstein recording as pianist -- in which he plays Copland's Piano 
Variations -- as well as other recorded documents of the young 
composer/pianist.
Bernstein's announcement was met with dismay in the music world,
especially at the New York Philharmonic, which he directed from
1958 to 1969.
In May, he canceled plans to conduct opening night of the
Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., citing ``a near brush with
pneumonia.''
In 1969, he retired from the post to concentrate on composing
and was appointed the Philharmonic's laureate conductor for life.
Bernstein was the New York Philharmonic's 25-year-old assistant
conductor on Nov. 14, 1943, when he filled in at the last minute
for an ailing Bruno Walter.
I was proud to be 
associated with him at the New York Philharmonic and the Israel Philharmonic 
Orchestra, both of which he considered family."
