Leonard Bernstein, the Renaissance man of music who excelled as pianist, 
composer, conductor and teacher and was, as well, the flamboyant ringmaster of 
his own nonstop circus, died Sunday in his Manhattan apartment. On Cahill's 
advice, the conductor had announced Tuesday that he would retire. In recent months, Bernstein canceled performances with increasing frequency. His last conducting appearance was at Tanglewood, Mass., on Aug. 19. Bernstein was the first American-born conductor to lead a major symphony 
orchestra, often joining his New York Philharmonic in playing his own pieces, 
while conducting from the piano. He etched other niches in history by composing the indelible "West Side Story" 
and teaching a generation about classical music via the innovative television 
series "Omnibus." Exhibiting remarkable talent and expertise in four areas that most artists wish 
they possessed in merely one, Bernstein still might have remained an obscure 
musician without the unique theatrical flair that dominated his personal as 
well as professional life. With it, he became a personality, well known even to 
people who never bought a ticket to a musical performance or watched a serious 
television show. The dervish persona, including his upstart gymnastics on the podium, never 
lessened throughout his long life in the spotlight. He made classical music understandable and palatable to the masses. But) Bernstein, at 68, remains a frenetic combination of orbiting 
rocket, aerobics master, super-juggler, matinee idol, booming cannon, 
hysterical mime, heart-rending tragedian, bouncing ball, sky writer, riveting 
machine, mawkish sentimentalist and danseur ignoble." Describing the conductor in the same concert, Bernheimer referred to him as 
"the shrugging, jumping, sighing, soaring, gushing, crouching, rocking, 
rolling, bounding, bobbing, leaping, jiggling, stabbing, hunching, bumping, 
grinding and grunting maestro in excelsis." Critics also were quick to agree that had his envied and often-criticized 
showmanship masked lazy, sloppy or inept musicianship, Bernstein could never 
have remained an internationally sought-after conductor for five decades. He 
knew what he was doing, and the musicians he accompanied, wrote for, conducted, 
or lectured to and taught admired him as one of their own. His 
father, Samuel Joseph Bernstein, was an entrepreneur of women's hair care 
products and a Talmudic scholar. His mother, Jennie Resnick Bernstein, who 
survives him, said her son always had an ear for music. " When he was 4 or 5, he 
would play an imaginary piano on his windowsill." The parents preferred the name "Leonard" and called the boy that. When his 
kindergarten teacher asked "Louis Bernstein" to stand up, he remained seated 
and looked around the room to see who shared his last name. His mega musical talent emerged belatedly and almost by accident. By age 12, he was studying at the New England Conservatory of Music and had 
determined, despite his father's objections, that music -- at that point 
playing the piano -- would be his career. He reveled in music while excelling in athletics and the classical subjects 
taught at the 300-year-old Boston Latin School. A fan and practitioner of his music, Bernstein met Copland in a typical 
it-could-only-happen-to-Lenny incident. Invited to a dance recital in New York, 
Bernstein sat in the balcony next to a man he did not recognize. His performance captivated 
the man he had met in the balcony, who of course was Copland. Ironically, Copland subsequently urged the torn Bernstein to make 
conducting, rather than composing or even piano playing, his career. The maestro also talked with Bernstein privately in his 
dressing room after concerts, promising to keep in touch. "The influence of Mitropoulos on my life, on my conducting life is enormous and 
usually greatly underrated or not known at all," Bernstein wrote years later, 
after his mentors had all died, "because ordinarily the two great conductors 
with whom I studied are the ones who receive the credit for whatever conducting 
prowess I have, namely Serge Koussevitzky and Fritz Reiner. . . . But long 
before I met either of them, I had met Dimitri Mitropoulos . . . and watching 
him conduct those two weeks of rehearsals and concerts with the Boston Symphony 
laid some kind of conductorial passion and groundwork in my psyche which I 
wasn't even aware of until many years later." Graduated from Harvard and out of work after a summer in New York, Bernstein 
asked Mitropoulos what he should do. "You must be a conductor," Mitropoulos replied, urging him to study at 
Juilliard or with Reiner at Curtis Institute in Philadelphia. It was fall and 
conducting classes at Juilliard were full, so Bernstein went to Philadelphia 
for two years. During the summers he studied under Koussevitzky, conductor of the Boston 
Symphony, at the new school Koussevitzky was starting at the orchestra's summer 
home, Tanglewood. He had no children of his own 
and I had a father whom I loved very much but who was not for this musical 
thing at all. . . . And so I found another father: first Mitropoulos, then 
Reiner, and now Koussevitzky. But the Koussevitzky relationship was very 
special, very warm." Bernstein later became Koussevitzky's assistant and returned to Tanglewood 
annually to conduct and teach. He so revered the maestro that he was married in 
Koussevitzky's shoes and white suit and always conducted wearing his cuff 
links. "I am going to need an assistant conductor," Rodzinsky told him. " I have gone 
through all the conductors I know of in my mind and I finally asked God whom I 
shall take and God said, 'Take Bernstein,' " he said, granting the position as 
a favor not to God but to Koussevitzky. Remarkable as his appointment was considering that he was an American and so 
young, Bernstein was given little chance of actually taking the podium. In the 
orchestra's history, no assistant conductor had ever been called on. But for "Lucky Lenny" history made an exception. Jennie Tourel had sung Bernstein's "I Hate Music" at her Town Hall debut the 
previous night, in itself an event big enough to bring his parents to town, and 
he had played for her and the post-recital party. With no rehearsal, a hangover and three hours sleep, Bernstein was to conduct a 
complex program broadcast nationwide on CBS radio. The warm, 
friendly triumph of it filled Carnegie Hall and spread over the airwaves." Bernstein was not to get his own orchestra until he took over the New York 
Philharmonic in 1957-58. He was too much in demand 
around the world as the wunderkind guest conductor. Successful as a pianist, composer and conductor, Bernstein, according to Joan 
Peyser in a controversial biography, consulted psychiatrists because of his 
internal conflict over the three pursuits. What seems right for me at any given 
moment is what I must do. . . . The piano became an occasional solo onstage or a celebrated party pastime. Bernstein concentrated seriously on composing while developing and 
commercializing his conducting career. In writing music, Bernstein achieved greater success on Broadway, and even in 
Hollywood, than in Lincoln Center. His best and 
best-remembered work, "West Side Story," debuted in 1957. When many suggested a decade later that he had achieved his dream with "West 
Side Story," he disagreed, saying: "There are moments when I think so, but as a 
sum total it fails to be an opera. Because at the denouement, at the dramatic 
unraveling, the music stops. "But I don't love it any less," he added, reveling in the adulation his 
adaptation of the Romeo and Juliet conflict had produced. " It doesn't make it a 
stepchild or a foundling." "An assessment of Bernstein must include his talent and contribution as a 
teacher and popularizer of music, a role that has set him apart most from other 
performers," conductor, historian and Bard College President Leon Botstein 
wrote in Harper's in 1983. Instinctively adept at television, Bernstein became a prototype for Carl Sagan, 
Alistair Cooke and others now familiar on instructive programs on the Public 
Broadcasting System. No one before or since Bernstein has been 
so effective -- artistically and commercially -- in proselytizing and bringing 
alive serious music to a mass audience." The television classics won Bernstein a coveted Peabody award. Bernstein was able to apply his innate ability for commercializing his art that 
had made him wealthy to the struggling New York Philharmonic. He introduced 
free concerts in the park and put the orchestra on television, widening its 
audience and tripling paid concert attendance. If two rings of the Bernstein circus rested in popular and classical music, the 
third was anchored in his uproarious personal life. "God knows, I should be dead by now," he said as he approached 70, 
characteristically cavalier about his health. " I was told that if I didn't stop 
smoking I'd be dead at 35. Raising the high-brow music world's eyebrows, Bernstein campaigned with other 
celebrities for the civil rights of blacks in the 1960s and against the Vietnam 
War in the 1970s. Criticized for "radical chic," his leftist political 
philosophy prompted him to host a storied fund-raising party for the Black 
Panthers in 1970. Although Peyser made a strong case in her 1987 biography that Bernstein had 
many homosexual affairs (Bernstein promised his children never to read the 
book), there was no question that he adored his family. On Sept. 9, 1951, he 
married Chilean actress Felicia Montealegre, and, despite a short separation 
and subsequent reconciliation in 1976, remained devoted to her and went into a 
severe depression when she died of lung cancer in 1978. Bernstein is also survived by two daughters, Jamie and Nina, as well as his 
sister, Shirley, and brother, Burton. Spokeswoman Margaret Carson said the funeral would be private. French President Francois Mitterrand saluted "West Side Story" anew in 1986 
when he made Bernstein a commander of the Legion of Honor. I've achieved more than I had any 
right to expect. SUPERSTAR LENNY: Too much talent, too little time, says Martin Bernheimer. Mine dates back to October, 1948, when I was serving as an American volunteer 
in the Israeli army during the country's War of Independence. The audience was a mix of black-tie patrons and soldiers dressed in fatigues. Toward the end of the first movement, machine-gun fire started crackling from 
the old city, held by the Jordanian Legion, and continued intermittently 
through the rest of the symphony. What would have been a distracting 
disturbance at any other time, melded, with the music as entirely appropriate 
to the mood and circumstances of the occasion. Lenny and the orchestra, never 
missed a beat. TOM TUGEND 


Sherman Oaks 

 
   Leonard Bernstein, whose wide-ranging talents
and flamboyant personality helped make him the first American
maestro to conquer music's international podium, was buried today
alongside his wife. Bernstein, who died of lung failure Sunday at age 72, was buried
this afternoon in private ceremonies at Greenwood Cemetery in
Brooklyn. His wife, Felicia Montealegre, died in 1978. Flags at Lincoln Center, where the New York Philharmonic
performs, were lowered in memory of the orchestra's first
American-born music director. Bernstein was appointed in 1958 and
stepped down in 1969 to spend more time composing. The Philharmonic will perform an all-Bernstein program beginning
Thursday and continuing through Oct. 23. His Emmy-winning ``Young People's Concerts'' on television
introduced thousands to classical music. ``He could have gotten a rehearsal pianist, but he cared too
much,'' Kert said. Longtime friends 
and colleagues -- those who knew him as Lenny -- paid tribute to the 
musical-theater dynamo with heartfelt and humorous words, and often in song. Arthur Laurents, who wrote the book for "West Side Story," hosted the 75-minute 
tribute to Bernstein, 72, who died Oct. 14. " Wherever Lenny was, was theater; 
his every move was a stage direction," he said, as many in the audience laughed 
knowingly. Another "West Side Story" collaborator, director-choreographer Jerome Robbins, 
had earned a laugh before he even spoke, thanks to Laurents' introductory 
words: "Fearless as Lenny was, there were two figures he did fear -- God and 
Jerome Robbins." After noting that he wished he were young enough to pay homage to Bernstein by 
performing the sailor's variation he created in the ballet "Fancy Free," 
Robbins, 72, recalled that halcyon 1944 collaboration between the two 
25-year-olds. "Lenny's music was the lifeblood of that show. His theater scores weren't just 
a collection of songs but were more like a symphonic work," noted Robbins, who 
also collaborated on several other ballet and theater works with Bernstein. He 
concluded in subdued tones, "We have lost a maker and shaker of our century. Carol Lawrence, the original Maria of "West Side Story," sang a medley of "I 
Feel Pretty" and "Tonight." Original cast members from Bernstein shows sang numbers they had helped launch 
into history. Nancy Walker sang her sassy "I Can Cook Too" from "On the Town." a work the composer 
often spoke of wanting to revise. Michael Wager, a very close friend of 
Bernstein's who was with him at the end, spoke movingly of how difficult it was 
for Bernstein to continue when illness had robbed him of his creative energy. Marilyn Horne closed the program with "Somewhere," the emotional anthem from 
"West Side Story," after which Laurents directed the audience's attention to 
the large photo that hung over the stage: an exuberant 39-year-old Bernstein, 
nearly levitating outside the theater where "West Side Story" had opened in 
Washington. The audience responded with a sustained standing ovation. Recordings by Leonard Bernstein, one of the most documented conductors in 
history, will undergo expanded release programs following the conductor's death 
on Sunday, said representatives of the recording companies controlling the late 
Bernstein's catalogues. However, 
most of the repertory will be from previously released recordings, including 
some made early in his career. In his last years, 
Bernstein recorded exclusively for DG. These recordings were made between 1977 and 1985 of music by 
Beethoven, Brahms, Bernstein, Haydn, Mozart, Stravinsky, Tchaikovsky and 
Gershwin. Called "The Bernstein Edition," it is being sold concurrently in 
Europe in a 25-CD set. BMG also plans, according to spokesman Carl Pritzkat, the spring release of an 
early Bernstein recording as pianist -- in which he plays Copland's Piano 
Variations -- as well as other recorded documents of the young 
composer/pianist. The entire Bernstein catalogue encompasses well over 200 classical recordings 
and occupies more than a full page in the Schwann catalogue. There is very little available on Bernstein in the home-video market, which is 
no surprise considering there are so few classical music titles on cassette. The 
lyrics are by Adolph Green and Betty Comden. * RCA/Columbia's "On the Waterfront" (1954), the Oscar-winner for best picture. Staff writer Dennis Hunt contributed to this story. Actresses Lauren Bacall, Betty Comden and
Phyllis Newman are among performers in the birthday bash being
thrown in August for conductor Leonard Bernstein at the music
center where he got his start. The Leonard Bernstein Gala Birthday Performance is a four-day
affair beginning on the composer's 70th birthday, Aug. 25, to raise
money for the music center. Beverly Sills, who announced last month that she will step down
as general director of the New York City Opera, will be the host of
the event. Bacall and soprano Barbara Hendricks will perform a
movement from Bernstein's Symphony No. Violin
soloist Midori will play two movements from his ``Serenade.'' The concert will also celebrate Bernstein's accomplishments in
popular music with excerpts from such works as ``West Side Story''
and ``On the Town.'' The season of classical music will be expanded with performances
by such popular rock, jazz and folk artists as The Beach Boys,
George Benson and Leo Kottke. But the highlight of the new season is the celebration of
Bernstein's birthday. Among the conductor's friends who have been invited to the bash
are pop star Michael Jackson and British Princess Diana, although
Tanglewood officials say the have not yet received an answer from
the celebrities. Bernstein was a member of the original Tanglewood Music Center
class of 1940, where he became a protege of Tanglewood founder
Serge Koussevitzky. Conductors Seiji Ozawa, John Williams, John Mauceri and Michael
Tillson Thomas will share the poduim featuring some of his works on
the night of his birth. The following night, Ozawa and special guests will appear in a
Music Shed concert for a performance intended to show Bernstein's
influence on other musicians. All proceeds go to the music center's endowment fund, and to a
fund Bernstein established for aspiring young conductors. This summer is the second in a four-year jubilee of the
festival's 50th anniversary. ``Leonard Bernstein will henceforth devote his professional
energies to composing, writing and education,'' said Margaret
Carson. He last conducted Aug. 19 at the Tanglewood Music Center in
western Massachusetts. Bernstein's announcement was met with dismay in the music world,
especially at the New York Philharmonic, which he directed from
1958 to 1969. We all will be less for the loss of his magic
baton.'' Bernstein, known for his vigorous style at the podium, once led
an orchestra performance at a liberated concentration camp. Last
Christmas, he celebrated the tumbling of the Berlin Wall by
conducting Beethoven's ``Ninth Symphony.'' In May, he canceled plans to conduct opening night of the
Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., citing ``a near brush with
pneumonia.'' Carson said Bernstein has had increased difficulty breathing in
past weeks. Carson said the conductor was
told that rest offers the best hope for returning to limited
activities. She said Bernstein plans to continue work on a new chamber music
piece to be performed next spring, a new musical theater work he
hopes to finish by summer and several educational, film and
recording projects, as well as his memoirs. Bernstein was the wunderkind of American music at a time when
all respected conductors in the United States were born and trained
in Europe. He conducted his first symphony, the ``Jeremiah,'' with the
Pittsburgh Symphony in 1944. His first opera, ``Trouble in Tahiti,''
was performed in 1952. He composed ``Candide'' in 1956 and ``West
Side Story'' in 1957. In 1969, he retired from the post to concentrate on composing
and was appointed the Philharmonic's laureate conductor for life. He has conducted 1,244 New York Philharmonic concerts, more than
any other conductor. Performances will include the Boston
Symphony Orchestra, the Boston Pops Orchestra and the Tanglewood
Festival Chorus under the direction of some of the many conductors
whose careers have been guided by Bernstein. The concert will celebrate Bernstein's accomplishments in
popular music with excerpts from ``West Side Story,'' ``On the
Town'' and others. Dame Gwyneth Jones and Frederica von Stade will
be among those performing highlights from ``Fidelio,'' ``Tristan
und Isolde'' and other works to honor Bernstein's landmark opera
recordings. Tickets start at $20 for a spot on the lawn and run up to $5,000
for benefactors, who get a seat in the open-air auditorium. Conductors were Michael Tilson Thomas, Michael Barrett,
Christoph Eschenbach and James Levine. Cellist Mstislav Rostropovich played a Bach sarabande. Singers
were the Westminster Choir, mezzo-sopranos Marilyn Horne and
Christa Ludwig, soprano Clamma Dale, tenor Jerry Hadley and
baritones Thomas Hampson and Chester Ludgin. First chair musicians from the Boston Symphony, Israel
Philharmonic, London Symphony, Santa Cecilia Orchestra and Vienna
Philharmonic flew here, at their orchestras' expense, to take part. The concert also included
Schumann, Haydn and Mahler as well as excerpts from six Bernstein
works. Bernstein was the New York Philharmonic's 25-year-old assistant
conductor on Nov. 14, 1943, when he filled in at the last minute
for an ailing Bruno Walter. For the New York Philharmonic, it was supposed
to be a night of Beethoven and Shostakovich. The fates made it a
night of Leonard Bernstein. The official catalog of his works says Bernstein led 74
orchestras. But this was HIS orchestra, and the musicians came to
pay tribute to THEIR laureate conductor, who led them through 1,244
concerts during his 47-year association with the Philharmonic. Also added were his ``Chichester Psalms'' (1965) and his
overture to ``Candide'' (1956). The substitute Bernstein program
was being repeated Friday night, Saturday and Tuesday. There weren't many smiling faces among the audience or
musicians. Then came the eclectic ``Serenade,'' which Bernstein's program
notes says is supposed to be based on Plato's ``Symposium.'' It
begins with a lyrical praise of the Eros, the god of love. The
piece is sometimes jocular, sometimes melancholy, sometimes
assaulting and sometimes hedonistic. The mourning returned after intermission, but not without
optimism. The second movement continues the
point-counterpoint of brass versus strings (Jeremiah versus the
corrupt priests, with Nebuchadnezzar looming on the horizon). In
the third movement, Jerusalem has fallen to the Babylonian king. ``How she sits desolate -
   ``The city once so full of people -
   ``She is become as a widow.'' The New York Choral Artists and a boy soloist joined the
orchestra. Two harpists dominated the center of the crowded stage. As well
it should: It was the 1,215th time Bernstein conducted the orchestra. The concert was broadcast nationally on
radio. At intermission, Mrs. Artur Rodzinski, whose late husband was the
Philharmonic music's director in 1943 and hired Bernstein as his
assistant, was introduced from a box. Violinist Jacques Margolies, who played in the Philharmonic that
Sunday, is still a member and was playing on Monday night. ``I feel older than all of them,'' said Bernstein. Monday's concert began with Bernstein's ``Chichester Psalms,''
with the splendid Westminster Symphonic Choir. Todd Caruso, a member
of the American Boychoir whose voice is high, pure and moving, sang
the solo part. Violinist Gidon Kremer, a native of the Latvian town of Riga in
the Soviet Union, was soloist in ``Serenade for Violin, String
Orchestra, Harp and Percussion.'' Kremer's sound isn't warm but his
technique is breathtaking. Pianist Krystian Zimerman, who was born in Zabrze, Poland, often
performs with Bernstein in Europe. All the performers donated their services, with proceeds
benefiting the Philharmonic's efforts on behalf of American
conductors. In addition to the Leonard Bernstein tribute that is part of the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic program this weekend, other local orchestras are also planning 
special remembrances. KKGO-FM (105.1) also devoted a considerable amount air time to Bernstein's work 
on Tuesday and Wednesday. The outpouring of emotions following Bernstein's death filled 
almost 200 lines (15 inches of small type) and encompassed 14 separate 
tributes. Among the contributors were conductors Zubin Mehta and Kurt Masur, as 
well as Peter Martins of the New York Ballet and Christopher Keene of the New 
York City Opera. is now being mourned by the entire world. I was proud to be 
associated with him at the New York Philharmonic and the Israel Philharmonic 
Orchestra, both of which he considered family." He said the biggest similar reaction he could recall 
came after the recent death of the mother of the New York Times publisher. "That was considerably larger," Horowitz said. The Bernstein family has requested contributions in lieu of flowers be made to 
the Bernstein Education Through the Arts Fund Inc., 25 C.P.W., Suite 1B, New 
York, N.Y. 10023. Conductor Leonard Bernstein has canceled several
performances in Japan due to exhaustion and lingering illness and
will return to the United States to recover, his manager announced
today. ``Leonard Bernstein is suffering from exhaustion as a result of
trying to fulfill his professional obligations while not having
fully recovered from several ailments he suffered this spring. Bernstein, 71, has suffered from severe influenza, pleurisy, and
pneumonia since the beginning of the year, Cahill said in a
statement released by Harry Kraut, Bernstein's manager. Dr. Angelo Aquista, an associate of Cahill, flew to Japan to
accompany the conductor back to New York, it said. Kraut did not
provide the time or date of Bernstein's departure. Bernstein had been scheduled to conduct the London Symphony
Orchestra in four performances in Japan, ending with a concert on
July 22. Bernstein inaugurated the festival last month. The Japan festival is believed to be the first festival in Asia
where young musicians can train with a professional orchestra.
