The Communist Party today admitted
that East Germany's socialist system has failed, and expressed
support for a type of partnership with West Germany. It came a day after
shouting matches broke out over German reunification during
pro-democracy protests in Leipzig and Dresden. He visited the Berlin Wall and met with
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and East German Premier Hans
Modrow. In another development, the largest opposition movement, New
Forum, announced it will take part as a political party in the
country's first free elections, scheduled for May 6. Neues Deutschland, in proposing a new party platform, said
``socialism has definitely failed as a social system in our
country'' and acknowledged that the ``popular revolutionary
movement'' of the past weeks had led to the scrapping of the old
system. During the past few weeks, both Germanys have increased business
and cultural ties but have debated what labels to use for closer
relations, since the East Berlin government rejects calls for
reunification. Others, opposing reunification, urged ``No Fourth Reich'' and no
transformation of East Germany into West Germany's ``plantation.'' Smaller rallies were also reported by ADN in Schwerin, Potsdam,
Neubrandenburg and Halle. The agency did not say if reunification
played a role in those protests. The meeting brought together officials of the United States,
France and Britain with Soviet officials, who have increasingly
expressed concern over calls in both Germanys to reunite the
country. The West German
leader advocates a reunified Germany that would respect the
security needs _ and borders _ of the rest of Europe. Gysi's rise followed the ouster of two sets of Communist
leaders. Three decades ago, a West German
politician said German reunification was a ``sleeping lioness''
that would awake one day with a mighty roar. Now, there is growing speculation the awakening may be at hand
to create a giant political and economic machine that could
dominate Europe. The daily sight of thousands of refugees fleeing East German
leader Erich Honecker's hard-line Communist rule for the capitalist
West has revived international interest in the debate. The idea makes East German leaders virtually apopletic. Full national reunification would completey rework the postwar
European order mapped out by the conquering Allies. It is a
prospect that creates unease in Britain and France, and in Poland
in the East bloc. ``West Germany withdraws from
NATO; and a referendum in both East and West Germany votes for
reunification and neutrality.'' That sort of talk is being heard more and more as Moscow loosens
its hold on the East bloc and countries like the Soviet Union,
Poland and Hungary explore democratic reforms. As much of Western Europe heads towards its own unification in
1992, the economic center of gravity would be shifted even further
to the German side with a powerhouse of nearly 80 million people _
61.1 million West Germans and 16.6 million East Germans. West Germany is already Europe's largest exporting nation, and
despite its many flaws East Germany's economy is the envy of many
Soviet bloc neighbors. ``This new fear of Germany is linked to German economic trends. Since West Germany and East Germany are at the front lines of
two competing alliances, any signs for eventual reunification would
have to come from Washington and Moscow. During a news conference last week in Montana, Bush said that
reunification is a ``matter for the Germans to decide.'' For his part, Gorbachev evaded the issue during a news
conference in Bonn in June, saying only, ``the situation in Europe
today was determined by historical realities.'' Outside Germany, political leaders and commentators have been
sharply divided on the issue. ``The Cold
War was conducted in the name of freedom and, today, if the coming
of freedom to East Germany brings a desire for unity which finds
its echo in the Federal Republic, we ought not to be opposed.'' More than 100,000 East Germans are expected
to resettle in West Germany this year, leaving a gaping hole in the
Communist nation's work force. Little is likely to change in East Germany as long as the
77-year-old Honecker and his aging comrades stay in power. During a September 1987 visit to Bonn, Honecker called respect
for Europe's present borders a basic condition of peace. There are virtually no indications that Honecker's successors
will be inclined to democratic reforms, let alone joining the
capitalist West. The calls for reunification have already found a sympathetic ear
among some leaders of the Polish Solidarity movement, in the
country that suffered some of the Nazis' most brutal savagery. ``Reunification is resting in our midst like a sleeping lioness. Tired and weak, indecisive people in West Germany are trying not to
disturb her sleep,'' Maier predicted in 1955. The lifting of travel restrictions by East Germany on Thursday
has breathed new life into the idea of a single German state,
drawing expressions of support from the Bush administration and
others. ``No one really wants German unity except the East German
people, and they turn out to be the decisive factor,'' says Hyland,
a one-time top aide to former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. ``These are the issues we really have to very hard think about. We have to think of a new structure between NATO and the Warsaw
Pact. ``That's why I hope it will be a reunited Europe within which
the reunited Germany can take place,'' Sorenson says. Bernard Rogers, a former commander of allied forces in Europe,
does not think reunification is inevitable. Some form of
federation, he believes, is more likely. Rogers notes that Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev has said
the nations of eastern Europe can do what they want so long as they
stay in the Warsaw Pact. ``Soviet policy is based upon preventing a reunified,
economically strong and certainly militarily strong Germany,''
Mitchell says. ``There must be some serious apprehension in the
Soviet Union today, because the events of the last couple of days
certainly has made reunification more likely.'' ``It changes all of the geopolitics and, in effect, ends the
period we've been in since ... the beginning of the war.'' Asked how soon the two Germanys could merge, Kohl declared that the March 
election has to come first, and "then I think it will all go very quickly." West Germany's Social Democratic Party is expected to campaign heavily in East 
Germany in support of a fledging branch of the party that has taken a 
surprisingly strong lead in public opinion polls. With the surge of the East German Social Democrats, political analysts are 
pointing to the strange role they could play in the ultimate political fate of 
Kohl. Ever since reunification became a blazing issue, Kohl's standing in West German 
opinion polls has risen, and if the national elections, now scheduled for 
December, were held today, he would have a good chance of leading his Christian 
Democratic Union to victory. ``The West Germans are moving ahead not out of nationalistic
fervor, but a perceived need to deal with a crisis,'' said Henry
Ashby Turner of Yale, author of ``The Two Germanies Since 1945.'' ``There is no such a thing as indelible national character,''
Turner said. ``The East German state is collapsing,'' said Geyer. ``So
something has to happen very dramatically. But they have a choice _
the Europeans and Germans and Americans. Do they want to opt for
the European card or for the German card? It could also mean, he said, that American troops might
have to stay in Europe as a counterweight to Germany. ``Then there would have been fewer chances for German
adventurers,'' he said. ``Even if the history did not exist, there would be fears of
that kind,'' he said. ``We're dealing not just with rational
calculation but a whole host of emotional memories.'' For all that, Breitman said, ``One Germany is not only
inevitable, but given the successful record of West Germany over
the last 40 years, my feeling is it is better than having a regime
in chaos.'' ``The only alternative to reunification,'' added Turner, is an
East Germany in ruins, ``a basket case, a Bangladesh of Europe.'' He said Germans have ``no significant interest in territorial
revisions. Gerhard Weinberg of the University of North Carolina, considered
a leading historian of the Nazi era, cautioned that reunification,
if mishandled, could prove explosive. While the people of West Europe have gotten over nationalistic
distrusts, East Europeans, living in closed societies, have not, he
said, and fear of Germany is a reality in East Europe and Russia,
he said. Mishandled,
reunification could scare one or the other of the participants into
starting something and scare others and goodness knows where it
would end.'' About 20,000 East Germans, many carrying West
German flags, demonstrated Saturday for speedy German
reunification, the official East German news agency ADN said. Kohl and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher also disclosed
that they expect a reunification plan with agreement of the World
War II Allies to be ready before the end of the year for
presentation to a pan-European summit meeting. Also Saturday, more than 100 East Germans protested in front of
the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin against the stationing of Soviet
helicopters in their country, ADN said. ADN said the demonstrators held signs saying ``Gorbi, what about
disarmament?'' The protesters, from the East German town of Prenzlau, claimed
the Soviets had backed out of disarmament plans by replacing a tank
unit that had been stationed at a military base there with
helicopters, ADN reported. According to ADN, the demonstrators, who came from church and
citizens' groups as well as from the town council, issued a
statement calling for civilian use of the base. Prenzlau, a town of 22,000, is located about 50 miles north of
Berlin. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met Tuesday with
East German Premier Hans Modrow and appeared to be more open toward
eventual German reunification. Gorbachev's position was similar to that adopted by Communists
in East Berlin on Tuesday. For the first time, the Communists
acknowledged German unity as a long-term goal but said it must be
imbedded in the process of overcoming Europe's overall divisions. Soviets say the question of German reunification is to be
decided in the future. Gorbachev, in comments to reporters after meeting French
President Francois Mitterrand in Kiev in December, reiterated his
view that the existence of two German states is a fact based on the
outcome of World War II. But he added, ``The present situation is the result of specific
historical events, a specific historical process on this continent. So, history should decide the future of this continent.'' ``I don't think it is a topical question today. Modrow said the two Germanys could work toward confederation in
phases with no time limit. In a TV interview on Britain's Channel 4, he also urged
``economic union'' within 18 months as a prelude to full union of
West and East Germany. Lambsdorff said that because of East Germany's political
instability it had only two choices _ unification or chaos. A Communist, he has moved
forward the country's first free elections from May to March 18 and
brought the opposition into a coalition that will govern until then. No one is predicting a date for a possible reunification. Eduard Lintner, parliamentary speaker on German affairs for the joint Christian Democrat and Christrian Socialist caucus in the Bundestag, said his committee has placed reunification on its October agenda. He said the sessions, which will include government officials and outside experts, hopefully can devise reunification models to discuss with West Germany's Western allies, particularly the U.S. 

   "It has become clear to the world that the Communist system in East Germany is in trouble," Mr. Lintner said. "There are still a number of imponderables," Mr. Linter conceded. But Mr. Walters caused a stir by predicting that reunion could occur in the relatively near future. Emerging opposition to uncompromising Communist rule in East Germany has raised questions on how long East Berlin's leaders can resist the democratic reforms sweeping through neighboring East Bloc countries. Fledgling protest groups, and the influential Protestant church, have begun pressing for reforms in East Germany which, if allowed to include free elections, could eventually lead to a reunited Germany, according to some Western experts. "The desire for reunification, a feeling of togetherness, a sense of nationhood -- all this has strongly increased in recent years," Ms. Wilms told the newspaper. "The recent escape movement from the DDR makes especially clear that people of both German states want to live free amongst themselves," she said, but cautioned that reunification cannot occur overnight. The first step, she added, "is the reform process in the DDR." Political realities have prevented the topic from becoming a serious issue. Analysts say that four decades of different systems would make reunification difficult. Further, many West German workers worry that a mass influx of East Germans could threaten their jobs. Unconfirmed West German intelligence reports appearing in the West German media said Moscow fears a growing dissident movement and mass demonstrations in East Germany by next year. He certainly will not say 'well done, keep it up.'" ``However, if that is the inevitable course, let us at least
place on record our concerns,'' he said. In nearly identical letters, he asked to meet with Kohl during
his forthcoming trip to Washington and with Modrow in Germany next
month. The letters were made available Wednsday to The Associated
Press. ``It is not an irrational fear of the kind that one explains
away as the nightmares of victims who remain locked into their past
and lose all perspective of present reality. Hier listed 10 points he wanted to raise. Chancellor Helmut Kohl assured
visiting U.S. senators on the eve of a superpower summit that West
Germany will not forsake NATO to reunite with East Germany, one of
the senators said Friday. There is growing discussion in West Germany about German
reunification as a result of sweeping social and political reforms
underway in East Germany. There has been speculation that West
Germany might someday be tempted to agree to neutrality if the
Kremlin stipulates it as the price for reunification. Kohl on Tuesday unveiled a 10-point proposal with German
reunification as its ultimate goal. ``A reunited Germany will not be created tomorrow or the day
after tomorrow,'' Skubiszewski said. ``Fears and concerns appearing
every now and then, including in Poland, are unjustified, although
alertness is recommended.'' Asked about German reunification at a news conference in Gdansk,
Solidarity labor leader Lech Walesa said he prefers ``no political
changes in Europe, but there should be all kinds of economic
integrations.'' Western European countries have agreed to form an economic union
by the end of 1992. West Germany has proposed a plan for greater
unity, but East German leaders reject reunification. The specter of a powerful, reunited Germany has troubed many
Poles, especially the older ones who recall the 1939 Nazi invasion
of Poland that began World War II. Some right-wing West German politicians have called for
recovering the 40,000 square miles of territory that Germany lost
to Poland at the end of World War II. The territory is about
one-third of present-day Poland. ``One can only unite within established borders and without
territorial arguments,'' said Skubiszewski. He also said German reunification is unlikely as long as West
Germany belongs to NATO and East Germany to the Soviet-led Warsaw
Pact military alliance. Disgraced former Communist Party leader Erich Honecker was
released from prison Tuesday night after justice officials
determined he was too frail to withstand the rigors of imprisonment
while awaiting trial on treason charges. He referred to the growing number of demonstrations in East
Germany in support of reunification. In West Germany, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher told
West German Radio that Gorbachev had ``correctly analyzed'' the
situation and again shown his political skill. Communist leaders launched their uphill campaign for March 18
parliamentary elections with a news conference to unveil their
``European concept'' that aims for a united and demilitarized
Europe. Party ideologist Peter Brie said the Communists support ``the
togetherness of the German nation,'' and urged a thoughtful and
measured approach to reunification. In an interview with the West German Bild newspaper, party
leader Gregor Gysi complained that the reunification drive is
moving too quickly. Asked if the Communists oppose reunification, Gysi told the
newspaper: ``No, not at all. But it is irresponsible to do things in such a way now as if
it were possible tomorrow.'' The reunification issue promises to dominate the election
campaign that will seat a new leadership in less than seven weeks. More than 340,000 people fled East Germany last year, having
lost hope that their spartan living conditions would improve. The
devastating flight has included as many as 2,500 people daily since
Jan. 1. The man most blamed for the country's problems, Honecker, was
set free after an East Berlin court rejected a request that he be
kept in prison until his trial in March. A spokesman for Chief Prosecutor Hans-Juergen Joseph promised
that the investigation against Honecker would proceed. ADN said the court acted on advice from two doctors who examined
Honecker independently. Honecker, 77, underwent surgery on Jan. 8
to remove a malignant kidney tumor. Honecker was ousted from the leadership on Oct. 18, after
massive pro-democracy demonstrations. He was expelled from the
Communist Party in December and has since been accused of treason
and abusing his power. Sir, The argument for an independent central bank is that it should be free
of party political interference, not that it should conduct monetary policy
without regard to national, regional or global interests. In Europe as a whole, very high real interest rates threaten to turn
recession into depression. Surely there
must be compromise of some economic habits to achieve the latter? Beyond Europe, the dominant economic forces are strongly disinflationary. But Germany is the one economy which, for reasons of reunification, could
afford a more relaxed stand on the inflationary front. This, despite the
unreliability of German money supply data. A DM exchange rate adjustment within the ERM is not the answer to the
problems. We need a prolonged low-interest-rate German reunification boom. The governments and central banks of Europe and the G7 block - including the
Kohl administration - should pressurise the Bundesbank, and be prepared to
consider constitutional changes if necessary, to halt this idiocy. The New York-based organization announced Tuesday that the
meeting is scheduled for May 8, the 45th anniversary of V-E Day. For example, Germany's borders
``must be sealed in cement,'' and the country should not be allowed
nuclear weapons, he said. Bronfman said he does not fear a resurgence of anti-Semitism
once the two Germanys are united. The conference will convene May 6 and a formal declaration on
German reunification will be issued May 8. It will be the first
meeting ever held on German soil by the World Jewish Congress,
which was founded in 1936 in response to Hitler's threats against
Jews.
