The Communist Party today admitted
that East Germany's socialist system has failed, and expressed
support for a type of partnership with West Germany.
West Germany is already Europe's largest exporting nation, and
despite its many flaws East Germany's economy is the envy of many
Soviet bloc neighbors.
Since West Germany and East Germany are at the front lines of
two competing alliances, any signs for eventual reunification would
have to come from Washington and Moscow.
During a news conference last week in Montana, Bush said that
reunification is a ``matter for the Germans to decide.''
``The Cold
War was conducted in the name of freedom and, today, if the coming
of freedom to East Germany brings a desire for unity which finds
its echo in the Federal Republic, we ought not to be opposed.''
More than 100,000 East Germans are expected
to resettle in West Germany this year, leaving a gaping hole in the
Communist nation's work force.
Ever since reunification became a blazing issue, Kohl's standing in West German 
opinion polls has risen, and if the national elections, now scheduled for 
December, were held today, he would have a good chance of leading his Christian 
Democratic Union to victory.
``The only alternative to reunification,'' added Turner, is an
East Germany in ruins, ``a basket case, a Bangladesh of Europe.''
While the people of West Europe have gotten over nationalistic
distrusts, East Europeans, living in closed societies, have not, he
said, and fear of Germany is a reality in East Europe and Russia,
he said.
In a TV interview on Britain's Channel 4, he also urged
``economic union'' within 18 months as a prelude to full union of
West and East Germany.
He said the sessions, which will include government officials and outside experts, hopefully can devise reunification models to discuss with West Germany's Western allies, particularly the U.S. 

   "It has become clear to the world that the Communist system in East Germany is in trouble," Mr. Lintner said.
Unconfirmed West German intelligence reports appearing in the West German media said Moscow fears a growing dissident movement and mass demonstrations in East Germany by next year.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl assured
visiting U.S. senators on the eve of a superpower summit that West
Germany will not forsake NATO to reunite with East Germany, one of
the senators said Friday.
There is growing discussion in West Germany about German
reunification as a result of sweeping social and political reforms
underway in East Germany.
There has been speculation that West
Germany might someday be tempted to agree to neutrality if the
Kremlin stipulates it as the price for reunification.
Some right-wing West German politicians have called for
recovering the 40,000 square miles of territory that Germany lost
to Poland at the end of World War II.
He also said German reunification is unlikely as long as West
Germany belongs to NATO and East Germany to the Soviet-led Warsaw
Pact military alliance.
He referred to the growing number of demonstrations in East
Germany in support of reunification.
But Germany is the one economy which, for reasons of reunification, could
afford a more relaxed stand on the inflationary front.
