Opposition leaders Prince Norodom 
Ranariddh and Sam Rainsy, citing Hun Sen's threats to arrest opposition 
figures after two alleged attempts on his life, said they could not 
negotiate freely in Cambodia and called for talks at Sihanouk's residence 
in Beijing. ``A meeting 
outside Cambodia, as suggested by the opposition, could place all 
parties on more equal footing,'' said the statement. ``But the ruling 
party refuses to negotiate unless it is able to threaten its negotiating 
partners with arrest or worse. Hun Sen used 
Thursday's anniversary of a peace agreement ending the country's civil 
war to pressure the opposition to form a coalition government with 
his party. ``Only those who want to prolong the anarchy and instability 
prevent efforts to set up a new government,'' Hun Sen said in a televised 
speech marking the anniversary of the 1991 Paris Peace Accords. International monitors said the election was relatively 
free and fair. Negotiations 
so far have proved fruitless except for the opening of parliament 
after a Sept. 22 summit led by the king. Sihanouk is reportedly set to fly 
to Beijing next month to receive medical treatment from his Chinese 
doctors. He was diagnosed with 
colon cancer in 1993, but it has since gone into remission. At least four demonstrators were killed by police, 
but the discovery of more than 20 bodies in the aftermath has prompted 
speculation that the death tally could be much higher. In his speech, 
Hun Sen blamed the violence on opposition leaders, saying the demonstrations 
instigated social and economic chaos. Negotiations to form the next government have become deadlocked, 
and opposition party leaders Prince Norodom Ranariddh and Sam Rainsy 
are out of the country following threats of arrest from strongman 
Hun Sen. Hun Sen complained Monday that the opposition was trying 
to make its members' return an international issue. Meanwhile, it says, the old government is holding power illegally. ``We respectfully 
advise the Asian Development Bank not to provide any new loans to 
the current regime in Cambodia,'' the two party leaders wrote. ``There have been 
reports that there is an attempt to internationalize the return of 
those members of parliament on the excuse of security problems,'' 
Prak Sokhonn said. When their 
claims were dismissed by a Hun Sen-friendly court, they rallied their 
supporters into the streets of Phnom Penh. The 
prince's party, in a statement dated Friday and seen Saturday, said 
such a scenario was unconstitutional. In the most recent elections, held in July, 
Hun Sen's party collected 64 of the 122 parliamentary seats, but was 
short of the two-thirds majority needed to set up a new government. A series of negotiations to forge a new government have failed. It was one of the main 
stumbling blocks in months of discord. ``The major political 
crisis in the country has been resolved and the political deadlock 
facing the nation has also come to an end,'' the king said in his 
statement. The 
agreement did not say how many seats there would be, nor how they 
would be divided. The king, the sole 
force in Cambodian politics able to broker a deal, pressured both 
sides to reach agreement before he leaves Saturday for medical treatment 
in Beijing. The CPP fell short of the two-thirds majority needed 
to form a government alone. Ranariddh's party and opposition ally 
Sam Rainsy held back their support, claiming the CPP won due to fraud 
and intimidation. His 15 seats in the 122-seat assembly are irrelevant 
to forming a working government. The prince fled Cambodia and did not return 
until a few months before elections in July. ``When we had 
two prime ministers, everything moved very slowly and decisions were 
made more politically than technically.'' Senior FUNCINPEC official Ahmad Yahya 
revealed Monday that it was also agreed that the CPP would control 
the foreign affairs and finance portfolios. The parties are to form working groups this week 
to divide remaining government posts and draft a constitutional amendment 
to form a new Senate. Their ability to repair their relationship and work together will 
be the key to a stable coalition. ``They have to be careful with the way they work 
and what they say. Sam Rainsy and the 14 members of parliament 
from his party have been holed up overseas for two months. Sam Rainsy said 
Wednesday that he was unsatisfied with the guarantee. He's got 
the premiership and legitimacy through the election and recognition 
from his majesty the king. Worried that party colleagues still face arrest for their politics, 
opposition leader Sam Rainsy sought further clarification Friday of 
security guarantees promised by strongman Hun Sen. Sam Rainsy wrote 
in a letter to King Norodom Sihanouk that he was eager to attend the 
first session of the new National Assembly on Nov. 25, but complained 
that Hun Sen's assurances were not strong enough to ease concerns 
his party members may be arrested upon their return to Cambodia. Sam Rainsy, who earlier called Hun Sen's 
statement ``full of loopholes,'' asked Sihanouk for his help in obtaining 
a promise from Hun Sen that all members of the Sam Rainsy Party were 
free from prosecution for their political activities during and after 
last July's election. The opposition, alleging widespread fraud 
and intimidation, refused to accept the results of the polls. ``The protocol on cooperation between the CPP and FUNCINPEC will certainly 
bring peace and progress to our nation and people,'' Sihanouk wrote. Hun Sen said Monday that the CPP and FUNCINPEC 
had agreed that the Senate would be half as large as the 122-seat 
National Assembly.
