Lebedeva, 25, who formerly worked as deputy director of a small 
food store, said that "to be this polite and to have everything this clean is 
new for the workers as well as for the customers."
While most of the Soviet workers trained for a matter of days, the four Soviet 
managers of the restaurant spent nine months abroad learning their jobs.
The Moscow McDonald's will be open for 12 hours a day beginning at 10 a.m. and 
will be able, they say, to serve more than 15,000 customers a day.
McDonald's invested $50 million in setting up the restaurant and a food 
processing plant in a Moscow suburb that turns out everything from meat patties 
to sesame-seed buns.
The joint venture agreement between McDonald's of Canada and the Moscow City 
Council calls for 20 restaurants, though there is no timetable or even a 
definite plan for when or where the second McDonald's will open.
McDonald's proven determination 'to be here for the long term' and to serve
Russians in their own currency as opposed to the dollars charged by most
other foreign joint ventures are just a couple of reasons for Russian
gratitude.
But despite the jolly opening ceremony - with Big Macs, musicians playing
the balalaika, and hundreds of yellow balloons forming a giant M - life has
been tough for McDonald's since it opened its first restaurant in Moscow 3
1/2 years ago.
Although the first Moscow restaurant is the busiest McDonald's in the world
the plunging rouble, high inflation and constantly changing tax rules have
been a challenge to McDonald's management, who admitted that they have no
idea of when it could recoup its initial Dollars 50m investment.
McDonald's hamburgers, fries and golden
arches came to China on Monday when the fast-food chain opened its
first restaurant in a nation famed for its distinctive cuisine.
The opening of a U.S. fast-food restaurant in China, where
cooking has long been considered a culinary art, may seem odd to
gourmets.
Daniel Ng, chairman of McDonald's Restaurant Shenzhen Ltd., said
it took two years to prepare for the restaurant's opening and his
ambition now is to serve 10 million burgers a year.
Sadik Seljami, a waiter in a small Pljeskavica outlet just a few
hundred yards from the McDonald's, suggested that the American
restaurant wants to drive Yugoslav fast-food outlets out of
business.
Thousands of queue-hardened Soviets on Wednesday
cheerfully lined up to get a taste of ``gamburgers,''
``chizburgers'' and ``Filay-o-feesh'' sandwiches as McDonald's
opened in the land of Lenin for the first time.
McDonald's of Canada Chairman George Cohon, the man behind the
deal, said many people were buying multiple orders and the
restaurant served 15,000 to 20,000 people in just the first five
hours of operation.
The restaurant limited purchases to 10 Big Macs per customer in
hopes of preventing burger-scalping.
One McDonald's associate said the company wound up importing
wooden crates from Finland for storing potatoes because ``when they
went to build crates, they found there was no wood, and no nails.
