Although cynics might complain of the steady homogenizing of world cultures, 
the arrival of the fast-food chain here -- 14 years after a Canadian McDonald's 
official broached the idea with Soviet officials at the 1976 Montreal Olympics 
-- was without doubt a major event. Most customers seemed thrilled to be part of it, even though some of them gave 
the Big Mac sandwich a mixed review. "It tasted very, I would say, unusual," Lubov Sereda, 45, said with a smile. "But those strawberry milk cocktails, well. . . ," her husband put in, flashing 
a thumbs-up sign. "It was very interesting, that gamburger," Zvetlana Generotova, 25, said, 
leaving with a large paper bag filled with take-out food, also a new concept 
here. " I certainly want my family to try it, at least once." Russians say "gamburger" because they pronounce Western words that begin with 
"h" as though they begin with "g." 


Another customer, Victor Kunyasev, said: "Well, my wife makes better food. But 
it was nice, a good place to take a break and grab a bite to eat." Some reported waiting up to 1 hour and 45 minutes to be served, but most did 
not seem to mind. The world's largest McDonald's, with 27 cash registers and a seating capacity 
of 900, brings to Moscow not only hamburgers, french fries and shakes (called 
"milk cocktails" here), but also a living lesson in Western-style marketing. At training sessions before opening day, cashiers were taught the importance of 
greeting customers cheerfully, of saying "please" and "thank you" -- all of 
which promises something distinctly different from the typically surly service 
at most of Moscow's dingy state cafes. "This is very different from anything I've ever done before," cashier Larissa 
Lebedeva said. Lebedeva, 25, who formerly worked as deputy director of a small 
food store, said that "to be this polite and to have everything this clean is 
new for the workers as well as for the customers." Sam Yahel, from McDonald's in Atlanta, who helped train the 630 Soviet workers, 
said the Soviet trainees were at a disadvantage because in most other parts of 
the world, new workers had at least eaten at one of the restaurants. Most of the Soviet workers had never tasted a Western-style hamburger. They 
practiced cooking using yellow cardboard squares in place of cheese and 
different colored poker chips in place of onions, tomatoes and pickles. "The Soviet Union is definitely a different world," Yahel said. " Our food and 
our standards -- it's all new. For example, we had to teach our employees that 
when there were still crumbs on the counter, it needed to be wiped off again." While most of the Soviet workers trained for a matter of days, the four Soviet 
managers of the restaurant spent nine months abroad learning their jobs. They 
graduated from the Canadian Institute of Hamburgerology. The Moscow McDonald's will be open for 12 hours a day beginning at 10 a.m. and 
will be able, they say, to serve more than 15,000 customers a day. On Wednesday, though, it stayed open an extra two hours and served a McDonald's 
record 30,000 meals. The previous record for opening-day transactions was 9,100 
in Budapest, Hungary, and the previous record sales for a single day was 14,000 
in Hong Kong. There is a brass plaque near the entrance that announces, "Soviet Rubles Only." Virtually every other foreign firm that has come into the Soviet Union in 
recent years accepts only hard currencies, meaning that it caters primarily to 
foreigners. The McDonald's prices are high compared to the state restaurants, where a large 
meal seldom costs more than a ruble. The Big Mac costs 3.75 rubles, or about $5 
at the official exchange rate, and dinner out for the family can come to two 
days' wages for the average Soviet worker. McDonald's employees are paid 1.50 rubles an hour, with a chance for an 
increase of up to 50 kopecks in three months' time. The staff was chosen from 
25,000 applicants. McDonald's invested $50 million in setting up the restaurant and a food 
processing plant in a Moscow suburb that turns out everything from meat patties 
to sesame-seed buns. Soviet farmers, who are supplying most of the products, 
have been given special training and disease-resistant seed for potatoes and 
cucumbers. The extra effort was necessary to guarantee supplies in a country where as much 
as 25% of the harvest spoils on the way to the consumer. Despite all of the planning, some shortages still affect the operation. Coffee 
is not on the menu, for example, because supplies cannot be guaranteed. The joint venture agreement between McDonald's of Canada and the Moscow City 
Council calls for 20 restaurants, though there is no timetable or even a 
definite plan for when or where the second McDonald's will open. Is there any fear that when the golden arches become as common as the cupolas 
of Russian Orthodox churches, it will be a sign that capitalism is making real 
inroads in the Communist capital? McDonald's officials say it is not a question 
that worries them or their Soviet counterparts. "There weren't many ideological discussions during these negotiations," said 
Marc Winer, 43, a native of Nashua, N.H., who is general director of the Moscow 
outlet. " The Soviets understood that the food was going to move very 
efficiently from the field to the mouth. That is more important to them right 
now than almost anything else." McDonald's proven determination 'to be here for the long term' and to serve
Russians in their own currency as opposed to the dollars charged by most
other foreign joint ventures are just a couple of reasons for Russian
gratitude. He also thanked McDonald's for providing jobs, a model of western standards
for the country's decrepit service industry, and finally for what he
described as 'the most delicious food'. But despite the jolly opening ceremony - with Big Macs, musicians playing
the balalaika, and hundreds of yellow balloons forming a giant M - life has
been tough for McDonald's since it opened its first restaurant in Moscow 3
1/2 years ago. Although the first Moscow restaurant is the busiest McDonald's in the world
the plunging rouble, high inflation and constantly changing tax rules have
been a challenge to McDonald's management, who admitted that they have no
idea of when it could recoup its initial Dollars 50m investment. 'It will depend on how rapidly we can open new restaurants, what happens to
the rouble, what happens to raw materials that we buy. We don't have an
estimate of how long it will take. There are too many variables,' said Mr
Cohon. Two corporate executives sat down in an office here last month to talk business with a bunch of clowns. The subject was no laughing matter, but rather the serious endeavor of finding South Korea's Ronald McDonald. Seven years after the U.S. hamburger giant first tried to bring its Big Macs to South Korea, the golden arches were finally going up. McAhn Industries Ltd. recently opened the first of what it expects will be a string of burger outlets in Seoul. The company is a 50-50 joint venture of McDonald's Corp., Oak Brook, Ill., and an accountant-turned-entrepreneur, Ahn Hyo Young. McDonald's is flourishing in 11 other nations in the region. But its entry into South Korea, which has Asia's fastest-growing economy, had been frustrated by its inability to find a suitable partner and to win agreement from Seoul on terms. South Korea may be one of McDonald's most promising foreign markets, business analysts say. The country is developing an essential ingredient for the success of a fast-food enterprise: a middle class. Hamburger-related fast-food sales in South Korea totaled $87.5 million last year, a 30% rise from 1986, according to the Ministry of Finance. Analysts say this year's rise could be much bigger, helped by a 25% increase in wages in mid-1987 and another big pay increase expected soon. The business is likely to profit from the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul in September, and from an anticipated post-Olympic economic boom here. The competition, besides Wendy's International's 11 shops and six of Burger King, a unit of Pillsbury Co., includes home-grown burger chains. McDonald's strategy is to take things slowly, avoiding extravagances, Mr. Ahn and Awad Sifri, McDonald's marketing director, say. "We're hoping to open three outlets this year and five next year. After that, we'd like to open five every year." Equally modest, he says, will be the initial menu: no breakfast, no Chicken McNuggets and no products tailored to national tastes, as offered elsewhere. Mr. Sifri says the emphasis will be on developing McDonald's image as an affordable place for the emerging middle class, rather than as a familiar name for foreigners in South Korea. Attention will be given to attracting children, he adds. Mr. Ahn says McDonald's talked to 16 potential partners before choosing the Harvard-trained accountant in 1984. Two years later, McDonald's and Mr. Ahn each put up $1 million in capital and borrowed an additional $4 million to form McAhn. The import question "came down to finding a supplier locally who could supply high-quality beef and potatoes at a value," McDonald's said. Even McDonald's golden arches symbol ran into red tape, since the city regulates the size and color of signs. "It may be against the law, but we're putting them up anyway," Mr. Ahn says. McDonald's hamburgers, fries and golden
arches came to China on Monday when the fast-food chain opened its
first restaurant in a nation famed for its distinctive cuisine. Hundreds of Chinese waited for hours outside the restaurant in
Shenzhen, an economic boom town near Hong Kong, for their first
taste of a McDonald's hamburger, fries or shake. ``You think hamburgers are too challenging for my age?'' Later, after purchasing her first Big Mac, she inspected it
carefully before taking a bite. ``It tastes good, I like it,'' she announced before slowly
eating the rest. The opening of a U.S. fast-food restaurant in China, where
cooking has long been considered a culinary art, may seem odd to
gourmets. It is estimated there are more than 5,000 different
Chinese dishes. In Canton, 125 miles northwest of Shenzhen, chefs specialize in
some of the more exotic Chinese dishes, such as cat stew, bear
paws, chicken feet and a famed snake dish - ``Dragon and Tiger
Locked in Battle'' - made from three kinds of poisonous snakes
stewed with leopard meat, and garnished with 20 spices, lemon
leaves and chrysanthemum petals. However, many Chinese, who earn an average $32 a month, are
still unable to afford fancy meals at restaurants. In Shenzhen, a Chinese special economic zone where foreign
investors have built factories, salaries are higher and workers
earn an average of $53 a month. At the restaurant, a Big Mac costs $1.14, a bag of fries 48
cents and a shake 74 cents. Another U.S. fast food outlet, Kentucky Fried Chicken, opened a
restaurant in Beijing in 1987, and it now has four outlets there. McDonald's hopes to open a restaurant in Beijing later. Although Kentucky Fried Chicken has become popular, the average
Chinese still regards a meal there as a treat, rather than a
convenience, and McDonald's could face the same problems. The 500-seat McDonald's restaurant in a three-story building is
operated by McDonald's Restaurant Shenzhen Ltd., a wholly owned
subsidiary of McDonald's Hong Kong. McDonald's Hong Kong is a 50-50
joint venture with McDonald's in the United States. It is managed by a Chinese national, Chen Tikang, and his son,
Chen Yin, who is the restaurant manager. The younger Chen returned
recently from a course at McDonald's hamburger university in Oak
Brook, Ill.
   Most of the ingredients used at the restaurant are now imported
from Hong Kong. But McDonald's executives hope eventually to get
their supplies of beef and potatoes from China. Daniel Ng, chairman of McDonald's Restaurant Shenzhen Ltd., said
it took two years to prepare for the restaurant's opening and his
ambition now is to serve 10 million burgers a year. Last month, when McDonald's advertized for 240 staffers for the
restaurant, it received applications from more than 9,000 persons,
including college graduates, officials said. ``I feel I have a better job prospect working here, and it pays
better,'' said Henry He, 25, who has a master's degree in garment
and textile. He is an assistant manager at the restaurant. A waiter at the restaurant can earn 53 cents an hour. A factory worker, who waited several hours before she was able
to purchase her hamburger, said she liked it because of its ``sweet
taste'' - the result of tomato ketchup, which is not commonly used
in traditional Chinese cooking. ``I just wanted to taste genuine American hamburgers,'' said
Milica Nikolic, a high school student who waited for three hours to
taste her first Big Mac. People curiously examined the renovated restaurant's plush
interior and the back-lit signs depicting the hamburgers, french
fries, milk shakes and other fare more familiar in the West. It
also featured amber-colored tables and floors, pastel-colored
upholstery, modern art paintings and discreet illumination. The fast-food outlet, located on a downtown square, had drawn
crowds in recent days, and they began gathering long before it
opened Thursday. Police kept watch on the lines of customers snaking around the
block, and they regulated the number who came inside to avoid
overcrowding. ``No opening of a restaurant in Belgrade has created such a
sensation as this one today,'' one policeman said. ``It is much cleaner, the service is faster, the interior is nicer
and it is not too expensive.'' The Belgrade media have suggested that the success of McDonald's
in Yugoslavia depends on its acceptance by citizens long accustomed
to a hamburger-like fast-food dish called the Pljeskavica: ground
pork and onions on a bun. ``In fact, this is a clash between the Big Mac and
Pljeskavica,'' said Vesna Milosevic, an official of Genex, a
Yugoslav state-run enterprise that has contracted a joint venture
agreement with McDonald's. ``Our aim is not to destroy the Pljeskavica on the Yugoslav
market,'' said Predrag Dostanic, managing director of the
Genex-McDonald's. ``We want to change customs of the local people
used to completly different eating habits.'' He said that lounging at tables for a long time after a finished
meal will draw a warning. Also, smoking is forbidden and alcohol
will not be served. This contrasts sharply with the Balkan and Yugoslav custom of
sitting with a drink in smoke-filled restaurants and chatting with
friends after the meal. The Big Mac meal, consisting of a hamburger, soft drink and
french fries costs the equivalent of $2.57, or about as much the
similar meal would cost in numerous Pljeskavica joints around town. Sadik Seljami, a waiter in a small Pljeskavica outlet just a few
hundred yards from the McDonald's, suggested that the American
restaurant wants to drive Yugoslav fast-food outlets out of
business. ``However, we will not give up the fight even if we have to
lower the prices,'' said Seljami. Glen Cook, an executive of the McDonald's Corp., said during the
opening ceremonies, ``We are very excited about the opening of this
restaurant, not only because it is the first one in a communist
country, but also because it is one of the nicest in Europe.'' McDonald's and Genex contribute $1 million each for the flagship
restaurant. They will also share the profits equally even though it
will be managed entirely by Yugoslavs. The restaurant has 350 seats and employs 110 people capable of
serving 2,500 meals per hour. In an effort to keep a high level of
services, the management is entitled to fire any employees who fail
to perform. The American corporation plans to open five additional
restaurants Yugoslavia in the next five years. The next East
European McDonald's, and the first in a Soviet bloc country, is to
open next month in Budapest, Hungary. Thousands of queue-hardened Soviets on Wednesday
cheerfully lined up to get a taste of ``gamburgers,''
``chizburgers'' and ``Filay-o-feesh'' sandwiches as McDonald's
opened in the land of Lenin for the first time. The Soviets, bundled in fur coats and hats, seemed unfazed,
lining up before dawn outside the 700-seat restaurant, the first of
20 planned across the Soviet Union. The crush of customers was so
intense the company stayed open until midnight, two hours later
than planned. ``I only waited an hour and I think they served thousands before
me,'' said a happy middle-aged woman who works at an aluminum plant. ``And it was only 10 rubles for all this,'' she said. ``I'm
taking it back for the girls at the factory to try.'' The restaurant, built by the company in a joint venture with the
city of Moscow that began 14 years ago, brought to 52 the number of
countries where McDonald's operates. The previous opening-day record for sales was in Budapest,
company officials said. Besides its restaurants in the United
States, the leading number of McDonald's are in Canada and Japan,
the officials said. Soviets got a first-hand look at such alien concepts as
efficiency and fast, friendly service. Normally dour citizens broke
into grins as they caught the infectious cheerful mood from
youthful Soviet staffers hired for their ability to smile and work
hard. Accordions played folk songs and women in traditional costumes
danced with cartoon characters, including Mickey Mouse and Baba
Yaga, a witch of Russian fairy tales. One Muscovite, accustomed to clerks who snarl if they say
anything at all, asked for a straw and was startled when a smiling
young Soviet woman found him one and popped it straight into his
drink. For most customers, it was their first experience with a
hamburger. They picked their sandwiches apart
to examine the contents. One young woman finally squashed her
``Beeg Mak'' to fit her lips around it. ``It's a lot different from a stolovaya,'' he continued with a
smile, referring to the much cheaper but run-down dirty cafeterias
that slop rice and fat or boiled sausage. Under the sign of the golden arches, accented by the Soviet
hammer-and-sickle flag, hundreds lined up for the long-awaited
grand opening at 10 a.m. on Pushkin Square, reaching out excitedly
for McDonald's flags and pins as the hamburger chain's army
fulfilled the Soviet penchant for souvenirs with Western logos. Publicity-conscious managers had the staff shout ``Good morning,
America!'' in English and Russian, for an American TV network. McDonald's of Canada Chairman George Cohon, the man behind the
deal, said many people were buying multiple orders and the
restaurant served 15,000 to 20,000 people in just the first five
hours of operation. The restaurant limited purchases to 10 Big Macs per customer in
hopes of preventing burger-scalping. McDonald's built its own factory, including bakery, dairy,
meat-processing plant and even potato storage yard, to provide its
own guaranteed supplies in a country where up to 25 percent of the
harvest rots en route to the consumer. One McDonald's associate said the company wound up importing
wooden crates from Finland for storing potatoes because ``when they
went to build crates, they found there was no wood, and no nails. They found you need a permit to buy nails.'' Pljeskavica is made of ground pork and onions, and it is served
on bread and eaten with the hands. It is sold at fast-food
restaurants across the country and costs about a dollar. Negotiations have been going on for years for expanding the
fast-food chain to the Soviet Union, but no agreement has been
announced.
