; Even if the volcano does not
erupt, the threat of eruption is likely to keep the base closed for weeks at
least, Lipman said.
; Subic base spokesman Bob Coble said
families at the naval installation had been asked to take in evacuees and that
others would double up in bachelor officer and enlisted quarters.
; Areas around the 4,452-foot volcano
covered by evacuation warnings were expanded to protect people against
possible slides of volcanic debris that could be triggered by the rain, police
said.
But it quickly
weakened to a tropical storm with 60 mph winds by the time it was centered
about 70 miles east of the volcano.
; Two people have been reported killed so
far, a Filipino serving in the U.S. Navy who died in a traffic accident on an
ash-slick road and a Filipino boy reported to have died after inhaling
sulfuric fumes that began to seep from the volcano last weekend.
; Most of the 16,000 Americans who live and work
at Clark were evacuated Monday, when scientists said it was clear that the
volcano, dormant for more than six centuries, was returning to life.
; Still, heavy rains churned up by the
typhoon drenched Manila and the provinces near the volcano, raising fears of
mudflows that could bury whole towns up to 25 miles away.
But it
would take several weeks of declining quakes and sulfur emissions before
scientists would be reasonably confident that the military could return to the
base.
; The volcano's activity
-- measured by seismometers detecting slight earthquakes in its molten rock
plumbing system -- is increasing in a way that suggests a large eruption is
imminent, Lipman said.
; Raymundo Punongbayan,
director of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, said
scientists could not estimate how much magma was still pent up inside Mount
Pinatubo, but said more eruptions at least as violent are expected within the
next three days.
; Residents of nearby Angeles panicked when a huge, gray-greenish mushroom
cloud burst from the volcano and turned day to night.
; Meanwhile,
President Corazon Aquino dismissed a British newspaper report that Americans
had warned her of possible radioactive contamination if the volcano damages
nuclear storage sites at Clark Air Base, abandoned Monday by nearly 15,000
Americans.
; Volcanologists know of no reason the volcano's activity could be
linked to the volcano in Japan, which is of comparable size.
; About 10 people in Moraza, a village on the
western slope of the mountain, were refusing to leave, relief officials said.
