An eruption this morning caused an earthquake so strong it "sent
seismograph needles off the chart," and registered 60 miles south in Manila,
said Jessie Daligdig, a government geologist.; Villagers tied wet kerchiefs
on their faces and used rakes, shovels and pieces of wood to push the blanket
of snow-like ash from roads. At times, winds whipped the grit into the air,
forcing cars to use windshield wipers and headlights in blizzard-like
conditions through the afternoon.; Two people have been reported killed so
far, a Filipino serving in the U.S. Navy who died in a traffic accident on an
ash-slick road and a Filipino boy reported to have died after inhaling
sulfuric fumes that began to seep from the volcano last weekend.; The
initial explosions on Mount Pinatubo at 8:51 a.m. Wednesday sent a
10-mile-high mushroom cloud of swirling ash and rock fragments into the skies
over Clark Air Base, forcing the Air Force to evacuate hundreds of American
volunteers who had stayed behind to guard it and to tend sensitive
communications equipment.; Most of the 16,000 Americans who live and work
at Clark were evacuated Monday, when scientists said it was clear that the
volcano, dormant for more than six centuries, was returning to life.; U.S.
officials have refused to say whether nuclear weapons are stored at Clark, but
they denied news reports suggesting a radiation danger if weapons depots on
the base were hit by molten rock.; Many of the villages in the vicinity
were holding Independence Day celebrations when heavy gray clouds first began
raining ash Wednesday morning. The mayor in San Marcelino, 17 miles southwest
of the volcano, was giving a speech to several thousand people when dark
clouds suddenly blotted the sun and turned day to night.; Calixto Macalma
Jr., a police intelligence officer, said people panicked as it began "raining
sand." Church bells pealed in alarm, sirens wailed and many ran for shelter.; Philippine civil defense officials said that they had evacuated 19,369
people from villages within a 12-mile radius of the volcano by late Wednesday. Along the roads, some people wore cardboard boxes on their heads for
protection; some rode their water buffaloes to safety.; At least 330
villagers, who had ignored earlier warnings to flee Aglao hamlet, finally
abandoned their homes Wednesday afternoon.; "There were big stones, like
this," said one woman who escaped, holding out her fists. " Thousands of residents of Angeles City, east of the volcano,
initially fled in panic from the booming morning blasts and greenish-gray
mushroom cloud that towered over the area. Passenger jeeps sped through the
streets, refusing to stop for riders as the drivers drove for cover. Most
residents later returned to the sprawling city.; But officials issued no
general evacuation order for Angeles, even though the city is next to Clark
Air Base. U.S. geologists advising the Philippine government said most of
Angeles was not at risk, apparently basing their assessment on earth samples
indicating that earlier eruptions had reached the area on which Clark now
stands but had spared what is now Angeles.; President Corazon Aquino
helicoptered to refugee centers near Angeles briefly before returning to
Manila for an Independence Day rally and parade at Luneta Park. She authorized
the release of $1.42 million for relief efforts.; Raymundo Punongbayan,
director of the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology, said
scientists could not estimate how much magma was still pent up inside Mount
Pinatubo, but said more eruptions at least as violent are expected within the
next three days.; Residents of nearby Angeles panicked when a huge, gray-greenish mushroom
cloud burst from the volcano and turned day to night. Thousands of fleeing
people packed roads.; "Stones as big as my head were falling down from the
mountains," said Rolly Soria, 18.; "There was panic everywhere," said
Manuel Romualdo. " Scientists warned of more, possibly larger eruptions from the 4,795-foot
volcano, which was dormant for six centuries until it began spewing steam in
April.; "This could be only the beginning," said Raymundo Punongbayan,
director of the Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology.; Angeles, a city of 300,000, is adjacent to Clark Air Base, but authorities had
not ordered a general evacuation there.; Hundreds of Americans fled Clark,
home to 15,000 American military personnel and their families. Most of the
base's residents had been evacuated Monday. The base did not appear
immediately threatened by volcanic flow.; Seismologists said searing gas,
ash and molten rock raced at great speed down the mountain's western and
northern slopes. They said most of the debris flowed into the Marella,
Maraunot and O'Donnell rivers and that there had been no reports that property
or homes had been damaged.; About 3,000 Aeta tribesman, descendants of the
original inhabitants of the Philippines, fled the slopes of Mount Pinatubo.; At a refugee center in Olongapo, 35 miles southwest of the volcano, survivors
told of the sky growing dark, then of hearing a tremendous explosion followed
by a rain of ash.; They said they scampered for safety with their
belongings and livestock over roads slippery with ashfall, many wearing
cardboard boxes to protect themselves from the ash.; "They were stunned by
the eruption," television reporter Bert Basa said. " Their faces turned ashen,
and it looked like their hair was standing on end."; Ash was so thick in
the air that at noon, motorists were driving with their headlights and
windshield wipers on.; A photographer who circled the volcano in an
airplane said an aerial gunnery range at Clark was covered with ash, as were
mountains in the Zambales range, normally lush, green tropical peaks.; Today's first eruption began at 8:40 a.m. with a tremendous blast that sent
forth a mushroom cloud. It was followed by a second explosion a few minutes
later and a third, smaller blast at 11:49 a.m.;    The huge plume could be
seen in Manila, 60 miles to the south, and reporters at the scene said it
blocked out the sun. The cloud drifted westward into the South China Sea.; Two more thundering explosions rocked Mount Pinatubo late today.; The
Philippine Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology said the explosions
occurred at 10:52 p.m. and 11:05 p.m. The second explosion sent a plume of ash
and steam 80,000 feet into the sky.; Shortly after midnight, a sixth
explosion was reported.; Seismologists said the volcano had plenty of
built-up magma and even more severe eruptions could come later.; "The
crisis has not ended yet," said Punongbayan, of the Philippine Institute of
Vulcanology and Seismology. " We have signs that the volcano is preparing for
another one."; Punongbayan warned people within a 15-mile radius of
Pinatubo to flee.; "The smoke is very thick like a dark mushroom in the
sky," television reporter Gus Abelgas said in a broadcast from Botolan, near
the volcano's western slopes. He said strong tremors preceded the nighttime
eruptions and continued afterward.; President Corazon Aquino visited
refugee centers near Angeles briefly before returning to Manila for
independence day celebrations.; The Americans who fled Clark with a few
belongings Monday moved in with sailors and their families at Subic Bay naval
base, 50 miles to the southwest.; Clark is one of the biggest U.S. bases
overseas. Punongbayan said Tuesday that the site was in the path of the
volcanic flow from Mount Pinatubo during its last major eruption, in 1380.; About 19,000 Filipinos earlier had been evacuated from three provinces near
the volcano's slopes and were housed in 25 makeshift evacuation centers
outside the projected danger zone.; Officials said more were evacuated
after today's eruption.; About 10 people in Moraza, a village on the
western slope of the mountain, were refusing to leave, relief officials said. They told rescuers that they would not leave their livestock and if the
animals die, "we will die with them."; On April 2, Pinatubo produced a
small hydrothermal explosion caused by underground water meeting hot rocks
deep inside. On June 3, the volcano spewed ash in a mild eruption.; That
same day, 4,452-foot Mount Unzen in Japan erupted with an explosion of
superheated gas, ashes and rocks that killed 38 people.; Experts say there
is apparently no connection between Unzen and Pinatubo.; There are about 21
active and 200 dormant volcanoes in the Philippines. The last major eruption
was the Taal volcano, about 50 miles south of Manila, in 1965. The volcano, about 10 miles west of the air base, came to life last week
after six centuries of dormancy. No casualties have been reported, but experts
are concerned that a major eruption could occur soon.; Gases, ash and
molten rock continued to pour out of the mountain today, enshrouding it in
thick, gray clouds of ash and steam that rose 12,000 feet.; The Philippine
Institute of Vulcanology and Seismology said it detected rhythmic ground
movements today that indicated molten material was rising to the surface of
the craters.; Institute Director Raymundo Punongbayan said Mount Pinatubo
was in the "early eruptive stage" and "after that we will have bigger ones."; He said most of the ash and molten rocks had been flowing westward away from
Clark. But he said geological studies showed that in the previous eruption 600
years ago, the main flow cut across what is now the western portion of Clark.; Rains fell across the area Sunday night, and officials warned residents in
the lush, green lowlands west of the mountain to move to higher ground to
escape mud flows.; Ron Rand announced the
evacuation in a 5 a.m. broadcast over the U.S. military's Far East Network. An
hour later, the first vehicles began rolling out of Clark for the U.S.-run
Subic Bay naval base, where the 14,500 troops, dependents and civilian
employees will be housed until the danger passes. Another 1,500 troops
remained at Clark to provide security.; The Clark command center operated
with a skeletal crew, but the base's operations were suspended. The base is a
major terminal for the worldwide network of flights operated by the Military
Airlift Command.; The miles-long convoy jammed the two-lane roads leading
to Subic, about 50 miles southwest of Clark. U.S. Marines patrolled the
highways, which pass through areas where Communist guerrillas operate, and
U.S. helicopters hovered overhead.; By late afternoon, U.S. officials said
all the evacuees had reached Subic.; "If it's going to blow, I hope it does
it fast so I can go home before the cockroaches take my house," said Staff
Sgt. Clark Air Base is in Angeles, a city of more than
300,000 people about 50 miles north of Manila. In Angeles, residents reported
no ash fell today but said the air smelled of sulfur.; In southern Japan
today, Mount Unzen continued to shake and spew hot ash and rocks, and heavy
rain was falling on the tons of ash and rock it disgorged over the past week,
raising fears of deadly mudslides.; Areas around the 4,452-foot volcano
covered by evacuation warnings were expanded to protect people against
possible slides of volcanic debris that could be triggered by the rain, police
said.; An explosion of superheated gas, ashes and rocks from the mountain
one week ago claimed 38 lives, and a larger flow over the weekend razed dozens
more homes. In all, about 9,800 people have been evacuated from communities at
the foot of the mountain, said police in Nagasaki, 30 miles away.; Mount
Unzen and Mount Pinatubo belong to the "Ring of Fire" that circles the Pacific
where shifting plates of the Earth's crust push against each other, triggering
periodic volcanic eruptions and earthquakes.; In the Philippines, officials
have evacuated more than 12,000 people in three provinces since Mount Pinatubo
began erupting last week. About 3,100 of them are primitive Aeta tribes people
who lived on Pinatubo's slopes.; Many of them walked or traveled by ox cart
to flee the volcano. But reporters found that some evacuees are returning to
their homes each morning to tend to livestock and crops and heading back to
evacuation centers at sundown.; Punongbayan said he flew to the area and
warned people there would be no time to escape once a major eruption begins.; There was no indication how long the Americans evacuated from Clark would
stay at Subic, but they were ordered to take along important papers and food,
water and clothing for three days.; Subic base spokesman Bob Coble said
families at the naval installation had been asked to take in evacuees and that
others would double up in bachelor officer and enlisted quarters.; Mount
Pinatubo, which last had a major eruption in 1380, began to show signs of
activity in April. Last week, it belched small amounts of steam and ash.; The
last major eruption occurred in 1965, when the Taal volcano, about 50 miles
south of Manila, exploded. Typhoon Yunya, packing 80 mph winds, slammed into the eastern coast of
Luzon island, which includes Mount Pinatubo, early in the day. But it quickly
weakened to a tropical storm with 60 mph winds by the time it was centered
about 70 miles east of the volcano.; Still, heavy rains churned up by the
typhoon drenched Manila and the provinces near the volcano, raising fears of
mudflows that could bury whole towns up to 25 miles away.; Meanwhile,
President Corazon Aquino dismissed a British newspaper report that Americans
had warned her of possible radioactive contamination if the volcano damages
nuclear storage sites at Clark Air Base, abandoned Monday by nearly 15,000
Americans.; Showers of
'mud drops';  "It looks like it's snowing outside," said military spokeswoman
Capt. Headlights and street lamps were turned on at midafternoon as
a "dark, black cloud" passed over the giant Navy base and dropped a gritty
rain of "mud drops," she said.; At least four people have died, 24 have
been hurt and four have been listed as missing since Pinatubo began erupting
Sunday, after lying dormant for six centuries, officials said. About 84,000
people, including Americans, have been evacuated.; Police said 12 people
had been arrested for looting at Clark.; Five explosions shook the mountain
early today, showering ash over a wide area and providing a spectacular
pre-dawn display of nature's fireworks against a backdrop of lightning and
rain.; Friday, eight thunderous explosions shot a cloud of ash and steam
nearly 19 miles high.; Friday's eruptions hurled ash over Clark, 10 miles
east of the volcano, and Subic, 25 miles southwest, where the Clark personnel
had been temporarily housed. Gray ash also fell in Manila, 60 miles south.; At Subic, base spokesman Robert Coble said generators had to be shut down from
time to time to clean out volcanic ash, plunging the base into darkness.; River temperatures rising;  Temperatures in local rivers were rising because
of the volcanic debris, officials said.; After sunset, the volcano spewed
two streams of orange, glowing material from its crater in what scientists
thought was the first appearance of lava during the weeklong eruptions.; A British
newspaper, the Guardian, reported Thursday that the Americans declared a
nuclear alert at Clark late Wednesday and informed governments in Manila and
Hong Kong that "a nuclear accident in the region was possible." But Aquino
told reporters the story was "baseless and purely fabricated."; The United
States refuses to confirm or deny that it stores nuclear weapons in the
Philippines.; Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus also said the eruption
should have no effect on talks on the future of Clark and Subic, where leases
expire Sept. 16. The talks are deadlocked over compensation and the duration
of a new agreement.; Punongbayan said Mount Pinatubo could remain active
for years if it follows the pattern of similar Philippine volcanoes. If it does erupt, the deadly hot ash
produced by the volcano could sweep across adjoining Clark Air Base, he said. Also in peril are the 350,000 residents of Angeles City, where the air base is
located, about 50 miles north of Manila.; Even if the volcano does not
erupt, the threat of eruption is likely to keep the base closed for weeks at
least, Lipman said.; Scientists doubt it's more than coincidence that the
eruption is occurring at the same time as the Mount Unzen volcano in Japan, he
said.; The five USGS scientists are among the few remaining people at Clark
Air Base, which was evacuated along with thousands of Filipinos living near
the volcano.; The researchers, along with 10 Filipino scientists and their
equipment, today  moved to a bunker on the east edge of the air base, 12 miles
from the volcano, where they should be safe from ash avalanches.; These volcanoes -- including
Mount Lassen in Shasta County, and Mount Rainier and Mount St. Helens in
Washington, all in the Cascade Range -- arise where one of the earth's immense
crust plates is slowly diving beneath another.); Pinatubo's last eruption,
600 years ago, is thought to have yielded at least as much molten rock -- half
a cubic kilometer -- as Mount St. Helens did when it erupted in 1980. Until
volcanologists' attention was drawn to it by a cluster of earthquakes beneath
the volcano this spring, it had not been studied well.; Other recent
volcanoes that erupted on the same scale were El Chichon in Mexico in 1983 and
Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia in 1985.; If it does have a massive eruption,
Pinatubo's primary means of causing death and destruction would be hellish
avalanches of hot ash -- 1,000 degrees or more, flowing and billowing at up to
100 mph, engulfing and searing all in their path.; "In the worst case, a
really big eruption, all of Clark Air Force Base could be covered" with
glowing ash, Lipman said.; Just being caught in a cloud of ash blowing off
the avalanche is fatal. That is what killed 38 people in Japan last week.; Such ash also would wreak havoc with the engines of planes at the air base,
Lipman said.; Planes flying through clouds of volcanic ash --
indistinguishable on radar from rain clouds -- run the risk of having their
engines stalled by the grit.; So far, the winds have blown ash away from
the base. But winds of the summer monsoon weather pattern, expected to begin
any day, would send ash directly toward the base.; The volcano's activity
-- measured by seismometers detecting slight earthquakes in its molten rock
plumbing system -- is increasing in a way that suggests a large eruption is
imminent, Lipman said.; The scientists also are monitoring tiltmeters on
the volcano's slopes, to watch it swell as magma builds inside. On clear days
they fly above the crater to measure sulfur emissions.; Their predictions
might be a false alarm -- the volcano may have done its worst already. But it
would take several weeks of declining quakes and sulfur emissions before
scientists would be reasonably confident that the military could return to the
base.; Volcanologists know of no reason the volcano's activity could be
linked to the volcano in Japan, which is of comparable size.; "No reputable
scientist I know of" is drawing a connection between the two, Lipman said.; More than 500 volcanoes have erupted in historical time, he noted. "
