The lawyers moved as speculation increased that Home Secretary
Jack Straw was close to announcing the decision he has to make by
Friday. Amnesty International fears that if Straw blocks extradition,
the 83-year-old general will be whisked back to Chile before the
group can make a last bid to keep him in Europe. Its first move would likely be to argue before a judge that any
decision by Straw to block extradition would be lawfully wrong. ``Effectively, we are seeking an injunction deferring
implementation of any adverse decision pending a challenge,''
Bindman said. In a press release issued here on Wednesday following a 12-day
fact-finding mission in Kenya, the AI accused the government of
violations of human rights and of dragging its feet on legal and
constitutional reforms. "If Amnesty wanted to be fair and objective, it should have
recognized the positive steps that the government has taken to
deal with law enforcement officers who have gone overboard in the
execution of their duties." The commentary said that "while hundreds of thousands of
innocent people were slaughtered in Rwanda, Amnesty International
was busy searching for non-existent 'evidence' of human rights
abuses in peaceful Kenya." ``As this important anniversary approaches, we hope that you
will begin to defuse possibilities for conflict by taking immediate
steps towards improving the human rights situation,'' Amnesty's
International Secretary General Pierre Sane said Thursday. The military responded with brutal force, gunning down at least
3,000 protesters, including Buddhist monks, and jailing thousands
of others. Suwimol Taewasilachaikul, director of the office, said the award
_ being given for the first time _ recognizes extensive human
rights coverage. NAIROBI, June 5 (Xinhua) -- Kenyan Vice-President George
Saitoti today expressed the hope that Amnesty International would
in the future "be sensitive to Kenya's national sovereignty". In response to a memorandum by Amnesty International on human
rights situation in Kenya, the Kenyan leader told the visiting
Amnesty International delegation led by Secretary General Pierre
Sane that his government appreciated constructive criticism made
in good faith. He pointed out that the government had appointed a task force
to review public order and security laws including the
preservation of public security act, the administration police
act and the societies act. The Kenyan government also appointed another task force to
review the penal laws and procedure and both task forces are at
work, he added. Ten soldiers are to face courts-martial over the abductions. To date only military tribunals have probed the kidnapping
cases. LONDON (AP) _ A judge who ruled that Gen. Augusto Pinochet does
not have immunity from arrest is a director of a charity run by
Amnesty International, the group campaigning for the former Chilean
dictator to face charges of genocide and murder acknowledged
Tuesday, while lobbyists stepped up pressure over Spain's request
for his extradition. ``In fact when Lord Hoffman was appointed to this case we saw
him as being slightly unpredictable on a human rights,'' she added,
noting that he recently ruled against a man who was sentenced to
death sentence in the Bahamas, a former colony which still allows
appeals to Britain's highest court. Unlike the 1993 United Nations-sponsored elections, which were
backed by 20,000 peacekeepers, Sunday's polls are being organized
by Cambodia. Amnesty International's Secretary General Pierre Sane told a
news conference that ``war crimes are being committed in Kosovo
today.'' Paul Miller, an Amnesty International researcher who returned
from Kosovo on Sunday, cited a number of incidents where there may
have been ``grave breaches'' of international law. (eml)
 

BONN, July 3 (Xinhua) -- The human rights watchdog Amnesty
International accused German police of racism in a report issued
here today, repeating a similar charge in 1995. Butler also accused prosecutors of being dilatory over claims
of police violence and the courts of being partial to police in
dealing with such cases. Amnesty International also complained of similar police
violence in Britain, Denmark, Italy, France, Austria and
Switzerland. The Kenyan Head of State pointed out that Amnesty
International treated police officers as if they were not part of
mankind. In issuing slanderous and baseless allegations that the
Rwandan army has massacred hundreds of unarmed civilians, Amnesty
International "is serving the interests of those who decimated up
to one million people in 1994," the army spokesman Emmanuel
Ndahiro told Rwanda News Agency (RNA) Saturday. Sane and his delegation arrived here on Tuesday. Foreign ministers from the group are meeting this week at the
U.N. General Assembly session in New York. At least four protesters were killed and dozens more injured and
arrested during the crackdown. Amnesty also urged the opposition, led by Ranariddh and former
finance minister Sam Rainsy, to refrain from using anti-Vietnamese
rhetoric in speeches. The government responded over the weekend to the U.N.'s
discovery of bodies with a report from its own recently-created
``Cambodian Human Rights Committee'' summarizing its investigations
into six bodies found between Sept. 1 and Sept. 18. Rwanda wants the
mission to halt monitoring human rights abuses and devote its
efforts to educating people about human rights. More than 54,000 people have been killed in the fighting since
1983. A year ago the government blocked two small arms deals to
Indonesia of Land Rovers and sniper rifles worth about 1 million
pounds (dlrs 1.6 million). ``The principal message that the government is sending to those
who flee persecution is to keep out of the United Kingdom,'' said
the report. Fourteen of his associates have also
been detained, Amnesty International said. He has since promised to promote human rights. ``In other words, it is
cheaper to kill,'' he said. Another concern for Amnesty International is conscientious
objection to military service. Rainha is due to be retried later this year in Vitoria, the capital
of Espirito Santo, a move that Amnesty International has backed.
