The commentary said that "while hundreds of thousands of
innocent people were slaughtered in Rwanda, Amnesty International
was busy searching for non-existent 'evidence' of human rights
abuses in peaceful Kenya."
In response to a memorandum by Amnesty International on human
rights situation in Kenya, the Kenyan leader told the visiting
Amnesty International delegation led by Secretary General Pierre
Sane that his government appreciated constructive criticism made
in good faith.
``In fact when Lord Hoffman was appointed to this case we saw
him as being slightly unpredictable on a human rights,'' she added,
noting that he recently ruled against a man who was sentenced to
death sentence in the Bahamas, a former colony which still allows
appeals to Britain's highest court.
NAIROBI, June 5 (Xinhua) -- Kenyan Vice-President George
Saitoti today expressed the hope that Amnesty International would
in the future "be sensitive to Kenya's national sovereignty".
The government responded over the weekend to the U.N.'s
discovery of bodies with a report from its own recently-created
``Cambodian Human Rights Committee'' summarizing its investigations
into six bodies found between Sept. 1 and Sept. 18.
Amnesty International fears that if Straw blocks extradition,
the 83-year-old general will be whisked back to Chile before the
group can make a last bid to keep him in Europe.
LONDON (AP) _ A judge who ruled that Gen. Augusto Pinochet does
not have immunity from arrest is a director of a charity run by
Amnesty International, the group campaigning for the former Chilean
dictator to face charges of genocide and murder acknowledged
Tuesday, while lobbyists stepped up pressure over Spain's request
for his extradition.
Amnesty International also complained of similar police
violence in Britain, Denmark, Italy, France, Austria and
Switzerland.
The Kenyan Head of State pointed out that Amnesty
International treated police officers as if they were not part of
mankind.
Rainha is due to be retried later this year in Vitoria, the capital
of Espirito Santo, a move that Amnesty International has backed.
Amnesty also urged the opposition, led by Ranariddh and former
finance minister Sam Rainsy, to refrain from using anti-Vietnamese
rhetoric in speeches.
