; Her race draws criticism; Even the color of her skin is
being used to determine the content of Clarence Thomas's character.
The fact
that she is white has drawn criticism from some blacks who see the marriage as
evidence that Clarence Thomas has rejected his roots.
; Clarence Thomas advocates a colorblind society, and his marriage may
be an example of that philosophy.
Dean Kelley, the National Council of Churches'
counselor on religious liberty, wrote a critique of Clarence Thomas that was
used as grounds for his organization's opposition to the Supreme Court
nominee.
They also have voiced skepticism
about his backing away from stands he took in past writings and speeches.
; Later, he referred to
one of Thomas' replies as "the most unartful dodge I've heard."
; "It is, in my view, inappropriate to
keep this up," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.
Thomas said Senate confirmation of his nomination would give him "an
opportunity to serve and give back" and to "bring something different to the
court.
"; If that's so, said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., "he's the only person gathered in the room who does not have an opinion.
He said
Bush assured him he was picked because he was the best qualified of those
potential nominees considered.
; Thomas is expected to continue testifying
through Friday.
; Two
pivotal members of the 14-member committee -- Howell Heflin, D-Ala., also voiced concern about Thomas' answers.
; THOMAS' VIEWS; Excerpts from Clarence Thomas'
testimony:; On abortion: "I have no reason or agenda to prejudge the issue .
"; Thomas expanded
earlier testimony by saying Wednesday that he believed the right of marital
privacy was "fundamental" -- a status that accords it the fullest judicial
protection from government intrusion.
"; That moved committee Chairman Joseph Biden, D-Del., to give Thomas a stack of the judge's past speeches so the nominee could "help
me understand them" during future questioning.
; Thomas, testifying calmly
but warily, did offer fuller comment on another hot issue before the high
court: prayer in public schools.
; Although Thomas appeared to back away from
comments made in past speeches or articles, he told the committee, "My view is
that I have been consistent.
; Thomas repeatedly explained that he made the speeches as
an advocate for administration policy, acknowledging that they often contained
overheated rhetoric.
; Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said he found it
"difficult to accept the notion that the moment you put on a judge's robe all
the views and positions which you held prior to going on the bench just
magically disappear.
"; delivered a long, stinging lecture to
Thomas, declaring: "The vanishing views of Judge Thomas have become a major
issue in these hearings.
"; She
said Virginia Thomas opposed legislation on comparable worth because it would
have involved the government in determining wages, which is "not good for the
economy, not good for workers, not good for women.
The author did not mention Virginia Thomas in his text, but has
said he was concerned about her involvement in the Cult Awareness Network
(CAN), a Chicago-based organization that says it educates the public about
"destructive" cults.
