Her critics see her as more than the supportive spouse who'll accompany her
husband, Clarence, through his Senate confirmation hearings, which began
Tuesday and are likely to run through next week. They see a woman with strong
opinions on issues that are bound to come before the court.; Her race draws criticism; Even the color of her skin is
being used to determine the content of Clarence Thomas's character. The fact
that she is white has drawn criticism from some blacks who see the marriage as
evidence that Clarence Thomas has rejected his roots.; In their respective
careers, the Thomases have embraced the view that women and minorities are
hindered, rather than helped, by affirmative action and government programs. True equality is achieved by holding everyone to the same standard, they
believe.; Clarence Thomas advocates a colorblind society, and his marriage may
be an example of that philosophy. Great justices have had community roots
that served as a basis for understanding the Constitution. Clarence's lack of
a sense of community makes his nomination troubling."; Some religious
leaders are troubled as well. Dean Kelley, the National Council of Churches'
counselor on religious liberty, wrote a critique of Clarence Thomas that was
used as grounds for his organization's opposition to the Supreme Court
nominee. That involvement, he said, might affect her husband's
handling of religious-liberty cases if he shares her views on the subject.; She
was troubled by some of the activities and eventually broke with the
organization. Since 1985, she has been a public advocate against cult
activities.; When she served as a labor-relations attorney at the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce from 1985 to 1989, she represented the interests of the
business community at congressional hearings on such issues as comparable
worth, affirmative action and federal child-care legislation. Asked several times by Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., "I think he's doing a beautiful job up there. They also have voiced skepticism
about his backing away from stands he took in past writings and speeches.; Later, he referred to
one of Thomas' replies as "the most unartful dodge I've heard." Republicans tried to deflect criticism over Thomas' refusal to
answer questions from the Democrats.; "It is, in my view, inappropriate to
keep this up," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah. Sixty-four-thousand questions on abortion
before we're done with this approach?" Thomas said Senate confirmation of his nomination would give him "an
opportunity to serve and give back" and to "bring something different to the
court."; If that's so, said Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., "he's the only person gathered in the room who does not have an opinion."; "That would
trouble anyone," Thomas said, adding, "I don't think it's accurate." He said
Bush assured him he was picked because he was the best qualified of those
potential nominees considered.; Thomas is expected to continue testifying
through Friday. The committee next week will hear from other witnesses.; Two
pivotal members of the 14-member committee -- Howell Heflin, D-Ala., also voiced concern about Thomas' answers. But the panel's
traditional third swing vote, Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., Thomas' opponents believe Republicans Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina, Hatch, Charles Grassley of Iowa, Alan Simpson of Wyoming and Hank
Brown of Colorado are solid Thomas backers.; THOMAS' VIEWS; Excerpts from Clarence Thomas'
testimony:; On abortion: "I have no reason or agenda to prejudge the issue . . or a predilection to rule one way or another on the issue of abortion."; On
affirmative action: "The line that I drew was a line that said that we
shouldn't have preferences, or goals, or timetables or quotas."; On natural
law: "At no time did I feel, nor do I feel now, that natural law is anything
more than the background to our Constitution."; HEAR IT, SEE IT; Senate
confirmation hearings for Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas are scheduled
to run through Friday this week and every weekday except Wednesday next week.; RADIO; (box) KQED, 88.5 FM Tape delay beginning at 9 a.m.; repeated at 9:30
p.m.; (box) KPFA, 94.1 FM Live coverage begins at 6:30 a.m.; TELEVISION; (box)
C-SPAN Live coverage begins at 7 a.m.; repeated at 5 p.m.; (box) CNN
Intermittent coverage. Kohl was
today's leadoff questioner as the hearings entered their third day.; And Simon said Thomas' performance thus
far "has neither helped him nor hurt him."; "I don't see how you could ask him to do anything more."; Thomas expanded
earlier testimony by saying Wednesday that he believed the right of marital
privacy was "fundamental" -- a status that accords it the fullest judicial
protection from government intrusion.; To
give such an answer, he said, "would undermine my ability to sit in an
impartial way on such an important case."; That moved committee Chairman Joseph Biden, D-Del., to give Thomas a stack of the judge's past speeches so the nominee could "help
me understand them" during future questioning.; Thomas, testifying calmly
but warily, did offer fuller comment on another hot issue before the high
court: prayer in public schools.; said he could not
understand how Thomas' prior statements touching on the 1973 abortion decision
could have been made without considering its content. " I'm not satisfied with
the answers," Leahy said.; Although Thomas appeared to back away from
comments made in past speeches or articles, he told the committee, "My view is
that I have been consistent."; and Howard Metzenbaum,
D-Ohio, will be joined by the three swing-vote senators and Biden, Leahy,
Simon and Kohl in voting against the nominee.; Biden and Kennedy declined
comment Wednesday on their leanings.; Metzenbaum said Thomas' refusal to
give direct answers "makes it more difficult to vote for him."; They accused him of being evasive and of disavowing many
controversial statements he made while an official of the Reagan and Bush
administrations.; Thomas repeatedly explained that he made the speeches as
an advocate for administration policy, acknowledging that they often contained
overheated rhetoric.; Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, said he found it
"difficult to accept the notion that the moment you put on a judge's robe all
the views and positions which you held prior to going on the bench just
magically disappear."; delivered a long, stinging lecture to
Thomas, declaring: "The vanishing views of Judge Thomas have become a major
issue in these hearings."; She
said Virginia Thomas opposed legislation on comparable worth because it would
have involved the government in determining wages, which is "not good for the
economy, not good for workers, not good for women."; Religious leaders wonder; Some
religious leaders are troubled as well. The author did not mention Virginia Thomas in his text, but has
said he was concerned about her involvement in the Cult Awareness Network
(CAN), a Chicago-based organization that says it educates the public about
"destructive" cults.
