He also said he cannot say whether Margot Honecker, who had 
informed Becker of her husband's death, will be allowed to stay 
in Chile.
``Honecker had lost touch with reality and had unrealistic
perspectives,'' Krenz said of his one-time patron, who for years
treated him like a son.
; Ousted East German leader Erich Honecker, who
is expected to be indicted for high treason, was arrested Monday
morning upon release from a hospital and taken to prison, the
official news agency ADN said.
Honecker, 77, underwent gall-bladder surgery in August, and East
German media reported he remains seriously ill. East Germany authorities on Friday
interrogated former Communist leader Erich Honecker about his role
in the killings of people who tried to flee the country.
Bild quoted Guenter Seidel, an East German prosecutor, as saying
that Honecker had used $42 million for stocking a private housing
estate for leaders of the former Communist government.
Earlier this month, East German prosecutors said Honecker and
former state security chief Erich Mielke would be charged with
treason and corruption charges for misuse of their positions and
state funds.
The medical panel concluded that seven other former Communist
officials, who had been among Honecker's closest aides, were all
fit to prosecute and to be placed in custody, ADN said.
He is accused of issuing shoot-to-kill
orders to East German guards at the now-fallen Berlin Wall.
Federal lawmaker Johannes Gerster said refusal to turn over the
deposed East German leader for trial could ``burden'' Bonn and
Moscow's ``outstanding relations,'' the Neue Osnabruecker Zeitung
newspaper reported.
East Germany's ousted secret police
chief threatened to break former Communist leader Erich Honecker's
neck when the two faced each other in jail, a West German newspaper
reported Wednesday.
Bild said Mielke and other members of Honecker's ruling circle
will be moved to a West Berlin prison after German unification on
Oct. 3.
BFN 

  [Text] Berlin -- Erich Honecker, the former GDR head of 
state, died at his house in Santiago, Chile on Sunday morning 
[29 May], according to his lawyer.
Honecker, the aging hard-line Stalinist leader who ruled East
Germany for 18 years, had previously been declared too ill to
withstand imprisonment.
ADN, quoting a Health Ministry statement, said Honecker was
still recovering from surgery for kidney cancer in January and was
not well enough to be incarcerated.
In recent weeks, East German groups have called for punishing
Honecker and for moving him to smaller quarters ``with an outside
toilet,'' Bild said.
